COMMENTARIES 

i)K  TllK  (HIKAT 

AFONSO  DALBOQUERQUE, 


02/1  il!j  ilo!c0  AulJ  nn  tiuvoliutlion, 


WALTER  DE  (IRAY  ElUClf,  F.R.S.E., 

srmon  ism'ihnc  '/r  iiir  i/ti'/>n ' v:  n ( of  mv.  ■.  mpr*  i.<  iHi!  miiinu 
Mt'Ki'vi,  iiiis(in\i:i  M/■lnKM>  o»'  1 lu  ho. 4r.  st^citTv  /.i 
/ti;  I'M/m;,  HONiifuiu  -i  ■ n':  i i.  \ ./►  ■nils  hkITUM 
*1.  isM  ( :>  r/dN , En. 


VOL.  Ill 


'*  Sc  as  aci.'Oo')  irAiOii'iuoriiiio  coinrauiiJs  c onlinariM,:* ; -c  a . sniis  einprozim 

nao  pastMissono  nx  m.  ias  /io  po.s.nivol,  nom  t*  pObUridwlo  n ti,;.  orilom  'Rm 

lLeroo.s,  noni  fi  sen  rmrac  ahoiianaM  morccpro  roverw.to  iwinn  dos  nocoI'h  futuros,’’— 
Ki.Ortio  pot'  Fr,  Xttv.  <h.  (flivif'i. 


UOND/ON: 

rKlNTKI)  FOR  Tlir  HAKl.irYT  (jOCIK'l'Y. 

■« 


M.nccr.i,xxT. 


,,  1..CI1ID.,  »7,  OM'T 


j 'j  i ^ I 

u YV.,  038SS5 


COUNCIL 


0» 

THE  HAKLUYT  SOCIETY. 


Coi-OIKI.  tl.  yULK,  C.li..  i’SKSlOltNT. 

AnmiiAi.  C.  r!  DRITJJKWATKB  BETHUNE,  C.B.  ) 

' [VlCl-rMBimtS. 

iMAjOB-OitwwiAt  Sm  HENRY  BAWUNSON,  K.C.C.  ) 

W.  4 TY8SKN  AMHER8T,  Esq.,  M.P. 

R|7.  Di.  0,  P,  BADGER,  D.O.L. 

J.  BARROW.  E8<e. 

WALTER  DE  GRAY  flIROH,  El<j. 

E.  H.  BUNBURY,  E8(j. 

Th»  E^«r,  or  DUCIR. 

CaMaw  HANKEY,  R.N 

Lurt  -GBifiiRAi,  Brn  J.  HENRY  LEPROY,  C B.,  K.C.M.G. 

R.‘H.  MAJOR,  Kbq. 

RuAB-AnJttRAt  MAYNP..  C B. 

CoiojrHi  fill  WM.  L.  MERRWETHPR,  O B.,  K.C.S  I. 

DRLMAR  MORGAN,  Es^. 

Admiral  Sir  ERASMUS  OMMANNKY,  C.B. 

Loud  ARTHUR  RUSSELL,  M.P 
Thr  Lord  STANLEY  or  Aldurlutt 
EDWARD  T^JOMAB.  Esq. 

Liri7T,.Gikrral  Sir  HIJNRY  THUTLLIER,  C.8.1. 

CLEMENTS  R.  MARi^AM,  0,B.>  ^oiroRiiT  Sicmtary. 


LIST  OF  CONTENTS. 


PoiimiT  OK  Dom  Y^ico  DA  Gama,  Sixth  Viceroy  ok  India, 


from  MS.  Sloan.  197,  f.  18  . Frontispiece 

INTROPUCTION  . . . . i 

CnrioNoiiOGY  ofJ^art  III  ....  xliii 

Title  TO arHE  Edition  OK  1774  -Part  111  . xlvii 

Titles  op  the  Chai’ter.s  contained  in  the  Third  Part  . xlix 


Commentaries  ok  Afonso  D-vluoouerque— Part  III  . 1-264 

“ lA  tter  which  the  great  A/unso  Dalboijmrque  wrote  to 
the  Hidalcito  ns  sonn  as  Goa  had  been  faketd''  . 20 

Speech  of  (he  great  Afoimi  Dallmpierfpic  before  the 
second  storudug  of  Malum''  . . .116 

3 , 

last  ructions  to  (he  Vortugnest  Amb<is.sador  setting  out 
'O' Siam"  • . , . l.'iO 

“ Oration  oj  Camillo  Portia  to  Pope  fwo  A’,  upon  the 
Comptest  of  Mnfnca"  . .172 

*•  Utter  (f  the  great  Afam  Dalbognergae  to  the  King 
of  Portugal  coneerning  the  Muintenance  of  Portu- 
gucse  Power  in  (toa"  . . . . 25S 

“ Articles  which  the  King  sent  to  Afonso  Dalhoguergne 
concerning  Goa,"  . . . , 26.'$ 


Map  of  the  Malay  Peninsula  and  A^aacent  Parts,  from 
the  Vortolano  of  Dieoo  11omem,^.1).  1558  . To  face  p.  \ 


CONTEm 


Pbdwrbb  of  the  Kings  of  Malaga  83 

Biru's-Eye  View  of  Malaga,  from  Correa's  Lmhu  da  India 

Tofacep.Vl^ 

Plan  of  the  Fortifications  of  Malaga,  from  MS.  Sloan. 

197,  f.  .382  ....  TofacepAZl 

Scheme  of  the  Portuouese  Coinage  op  Malaga  . .140 

Probable  Plan  of  the  Military  Operations  of  Afonso 
Dalboquerqi'e  against  Ko^algao  . . 224 

Portrait  of  Diogo  Lopes  ue  Siqueyua,  Fourth  Viceroy  of 

A * 

India,  from  MS.  .Sloan,  107,  f.  lo  . To  face  p.  254 


Appendix 


265 


INTRODUCTION. 


0 grande  Cavalleiro, 

Que  ao  vento  v4laa  deu  tia  occidua  parte, 

E W,  oade  infante  o Sol  da  luz  primeiro, 

Fixou  das  Qninnii  santafi  o Estendarte. 

E com  afronta  do  infernal  guerreiro, 

(Mcrc^  do  Ceo)  ganhou  por  for^a,  e ai-te 
*0  aureo  Reino,  e trocou  com  pio  exemplo 
A profana  meequita  em  saCro  templo. 

» # * # 

0 tempo  chega,  Affonwi,  em  que  a eauta 
SUo  tord  por  vds  a liberdade, 

A Monarquia,  que  hoje  o Ceo  levanta, 

Devot(»  (X»n^agrattdo  a etemidatlc. 

0,  bem  nancida  generosa  planta, 

Que  em  flor  fruoto  ha  de  dar  d Chi  iatajidade, 

E materia  a mil  cyenee,  que,  cantando 
De  vds,  86  hirio  com?08co  eternizando. 

De  Chiitito  a injusta  morte  vingou  Tito 
Na  de  Jeruaaient  total  ruina : 

E a V(58,  a (luem  Deos  deu  hum  peito  invitt(», 

Ser  ringador  de  eua  Fe  deetina. 

Extinguir  do  Agarcno  o falao  rito 
He  de  vo6bo  valor  a empreza  dina; 

Tomai  poi«  o ba«t5o  de  empreza  grande 
Para  o tempo  que  o Ceo  marchar  vob  maude. 

Mai^ca  Conqutbtaiu 
j)do  grande  Affonto  Dt  Albuquerque. 
Poma  de  Francesco  dc  iia'  de 


J.JU1  Afliru-Part  of  the  CdkMENTARIES  OF  THE  GrRAT 
Afonsp  Dalboquerque,  a trrfhfllation  of  which  is  ^iven 
ia  this  volume  maintains  the  finterest  in  the  Portu- 
gaese  hero  which  was  awakened  hf  the  previous 


11 


lOTEODUCTION. 


volumes.  To  the  conquest  of  Ormuz  ami  Goa,  already 
published,  we  have  here  in  continuation  the  second 
conquest  of  Goa,  and  the  extension  of  the  Portuguese 
empire  to  the  Malay  peninsula. 

The  volume  opens  with  the  return  of  Afonso  Dalbo- 
querque  to  Cananor,  from  wlych  port  he  set  sail  with 
twenty  ships,  and  put  into  Onor  for  supplieianil^^^er* 
Here  he  learned  the  imposing  strength  of  the  Hidalcao 
(about  eight  thousand  Turks,  Rumes,  and  Moors  against 
seventeen  hundred  Portuguese),  from  Timoja  and  the 
/riendly  king  of  Gar9opa,  and  then  pjoceftded  by  way 
of  Anjadiva  to  the  river  of  Goa.  A council  was  here- 
upon held,  which  resulted  in  an  unanimous  determina- 
tion to  attack  the  city  at  once,  without  relying  upon 
the  aid  promised  by  the  native  chiefs.  The  forces  were 
divided,  but  not  without  much  opposition  on  the  part 
of  the  captains,  into  three  companies:  one,  commanded 
by  Manuel  da  Cunha  and  Manuel  de  Lacerda,  to  attack 
the  stockades  near  the*  citadel ; another,  under  the 
leadership  of  Diogo  Mendez  de  Vasconcejos,  to  storm 
the  palisades  near  the  sea  ; and  a third,  under  the 
command  of  the  Viceroy  himself,  to  take  ttie  stockades 
in  flank. 

On  the  following  morning,  the  25th  of  November, 
1510,  with  an  eflSgy  of  their  nationak  patron,  St. 
James  the  greater,  carried  in  the  van,  a general  assault 
was  carried  out,  the  stockades  entered,  and  all  who 
resisted  the  ^Ward  progress  of^the  besiegers  put  to 
the  sword ; while  of  fhose  who  fled  away  in  their 
ove^lthe  nuftierous  fords  and.  passes  an  im- 
laense  number  were  di^wned.  In  this  brilliant  en-  ‘ 


INTEODUCTION. 


iil 


gagemeut  sev^  of  the  Portuguese  officers  were  killed, 
among  whom  the  author  of  the  Commentaries  espo 
cially  signalises  D.  Jcronymo  de  Lima,  Andre  cle 
Afonseca,  Antonio  Graces,  and  Alvaro  Gomez,  while 
on  the  side  of  the  enemy  not  less  than  two  thousand, 
about  one-fourth  of  the,  whole  native  strength,  were 
estimated  to  have  perished. 

In  the  sack  which  ensued,  besides  the  miscclliuicous 
plunder,  none  of  which  Afonso  Dalboquerque  cared  to 
appropriate,  a considerable  quantity  of  artillery,  muni- 
tions^ and  hdtse^  were  taken,  and  in  accordance  with 
thc^ bloodthirsty  laws  which  appear  to  have  regulated 
such  dtcaaions,  not  only  in  India,  but  in  other  coun- 
tries claiming  to  be  far  more  civilised  at  the  period, 
no  quarter  vvas  given^;  none  of  the  hated  sect  of  Maho- 
met were  spared ; * men,  women,  and  children  were 
mercilessly  put  to  death ; and  as  a punishment  for  the 
treachery  of  which  the  Moors  had  been  guilty  when 
Afonso  Dalboquerque  took  the  city  for  the  first  time, 
for  four  days  incessantly  the  Portuguese  and  Hin- 
doos poured  out  the  blood  of  the  Moors  who  were 
found  therein  ; and  it  was  ascertained  that  of  men, 
women,  and  children  the  number  killed  exceeded  six 
thousand.^  On  this  occasion  the  Viceroy  is  stated  to 
have  perpetrated  a very  horrible  act  of  vengeance 
agai|)St  the  enemy ; a mosque  was  filled  with  Moors 
taken  captive  by  the  Hindoos  and  then  set  on  fire; 
and  amoD^  the  pe(^le  wfio  thus  perished  was  a de- 
serter who  had  gone  over  to  *the  HidaMo  and  turned 
Mahometan^  wlien  Goa  was  taketi'for  the  first  time. 

^ Pajre  t6. 


IV 


urraoDucTioN. 


No  time  was  lost  by  Afonso  Dalboqulrque  in  forti- 
fying the  city,  every  one,  from  the  highest  to  the  low- 
est, bad  to  take  his  share  of  duty,  and  the  walls,  towers, 
and  ditches  were  completed  in  a marvellously  short 
space  of  time,  where  it  now  stands"',  for  the  plan  of 
which  the  reader  is  referred  to  vol.  ii,  p.  88.^  During 
the  excavations  a bronze  crucifix  was  dug  up  in  the 
course  of  demolishing  some  old  foundations.  Curiously 
enough,  Correa^  mentions  a similar  discovery  in  No- 
vember 1512  in  these  terms : “Tambem  o Gouernador 
nVstas  naos  mandou  a ElJRey  huma  caixinSa  de  pr^jta,  e 
dentro  metido  hum  corpo  de  crucificio,  que  foy  acb^do 
per  hum  homem  cauando  pera  fazer  hum  po^>  e o 
achou  tendo  feito  coua  de  tres  brajas,  que  so  achou  no 
inueruo,  que  foy  d'esta  maneyrtf  : que  cauando  hum 
pobre  homem  pera  fozer  hum  poyo,  tendo  altura  de 
tres  brayas,  achou  hum  corpo  de  crucificio  de  grandura 
menos  de  hum  palmo,  aberto  por  detids,  muyto  gastado, 
e 0 rostro  bom  e barbas,  e o brafo  direito  polo  cotouello 
sdmente,  e o esquerdo  inteiro  e o corpo  e penias  e p^s 
enteiros,  e feito  de  hum  metal  que  ouriues  e lapidairos 
nunqua  souberao  conhecer,  nem  com  o buril  o poder&o 
descobrir,  que  nada  entrava  n'elle : o que  fez  grande, 
espanto  no  Gouernador  e todos  os  fidalgos,  que  caso 
podia  ser  em  tal  lugar  terra  de  mouros  de  Cantos  annos, 

^ One  of  the  most  exhaustive  works  on  Pi^rtuguese  Qoa  is  that 
entitled,  An  Historical  and  ArShceological  Sketch  of  the  City  of 
Goa,  preceded  by  a short  Statistical  Account  of  the  territory  of 
Goa,  written  by  authorisation  of  the  Oovernment,  by  Jos^  Nicolau 
da  Fonseca,  President  of  tfie  ^Soci^ade  dos  Atnigos  das  LetraS'.^’ 
Bombay,  187S,  8vo.  • » LttidoA  da  India,  1,  ii,  p.  328. 


INTIlOBUCTIO^r. 


V 

sem  auer  meraiiria  que  nunqua  n'ella  ouvesae  chriataos/' 
*‘Tbe  governor,  Afonso  Dalboquerque,  also  sent  to  the 
king  in  these  ships  a small  casket  of  sUver,  and  within 
it  the  figure  of  our  Saviour  frofn  a crucifix,  which  had 
been  found  by  a’  poor  man  who  was  digging  the 
foundation  for  a well.  ^This  man  found  it  when  he 
had  dug  down  as  deep  as  three  fathoms,  and  it  was  in 
the  winter  under  the  following  circumstances.  There 
was  a poor  man  digging  the  foundation  for  a well,  and 
at  the  depth  of  three  fathoms  he  found  the  figure  from 
a crucifix  o?  thg  height  of  less  than  a palm,  hollow 
behind,  very  worn,  but  the  countenance  and  beard 
w^ell  plfeserved  ; the  right  arm  broken  off  at  the  elbow, 
the  left  whole,  the  body,  legs,  and  feet  uninjured,  made 
of  a metal  unknown'^to  the  goldsmiths  and  lapidaries, 
for  it  could  not  be  scratched  with  the  point  of  a graver. 
This  excited  great  wonder  in  the  governor  and  Fidal- 
goes  how  it  could  have  chanced  to  get  into  suZh  aplace, 
for  so  many  years  the  country  of  Moors,  in  which 
there  was  np  remembrance  of  there  ever  having  been 
any  Christian  inhabitants.^' 

In  return  for  this  victory  Afonso  Dalboquerque  made 
several  presents  to  the  convent  of  Palmela,  the  head 
of  the  military  order  of  Santiago,  and  to  the  church  of 
the  same  saint  in  Gallicia  a lamp,  and  money  to  be 
invested  for  the  supply  of  oil  for  the  lamp.  A similar 
gift  of  a lamp  a^pd  provision  for  its  oil  was  made  by 
the  viceroy  on  a later  dfecasion,  when  he  narrowly 
escaped  Seath  from  a cannon  1>all. 

The  nows  of^the  fall  of  Goa  effected  a rapid  change 
in  the  attitude  of  the  Indian  princes  towards  the  Portu- 


vi  MTEODUOTION. 

guese.  The  king  of  Cambaya  Bet  *Afonso  de 

Noronba,  nephew  of  Afonso  Dalboquerque,  and  offered 
the  site  for  a fortress  at  Diu,  and  the  preparation  of  a 
Turkish  fleet  to  operate  against  the  Portuguese  was 
countermanded  by  the  Grand  Sultan  of  Cairo.  The 
letter  sent  by  Dalboquerque  to  the  HidalcSo  announcing 
the  capture  of  Goa,  and  offering  the  monopoly  of  the 
important  trade  in  horses,  also  plainly  shows  the  rapid 
exaltation  of  Portuguese  prestige,  in  consequence  of 
this  event.  Not  long  after  this,  Meliqueaye,  (perhaps 
the  Portuguese  equivalent  of  Melek  Jahya,)  was  sent 
by  the  Hidalcao  against  the  island,  but  he  and*  his 
numerous  army  were  routed  without  much  difficulty, 
and  the  erection  of  the  fortress,  the  colonisation  of  the 
newly  acquired  territory  by  Hitidoo  families  (a  race  to 
whom  Afonso  Dalboquerque,  throughout  his  career,, 
always  manifested  great  kindness),  and  the  consolida- 
tion of  the  government  of  the  province,  for  province 
indeed  it  was,  proceeded  rapidly  and  without  inter- 
ruption. , 

The  advent  of  the  royal  Hindoo  Merlao  (or  Milrrhau, 
as  he  is  called  in  the  latter  part  of  this  volume)  enabled 
Afonso  Dalboquerque  to  gratify  the  native  Hindoos 
and  Nequibares,  and  at  the  same  time  to  ingratiate 
himself  with  them,  by  conferring  upon  him*.the  farmer- 
generalship  of  the  newly  acquired  territory  for  about 
thirty  thousand  pounds — a considertdile  sum  in  those 
days,  and  a welcome  addition  to  the  revenues  of 
Portugal.  But  these  mdtters  did  not  cause  *ihe  Vice- 
roy to  forget  the  othca  parts  of  his  Indian  jurisdiction, 
and  in  accordance  with  Boyal  instructions  he  dispatched 


INTBODCOTIOK. 


vii 


Diogo  Pdfeanief  de  B4ja  with  a fleet  of  three  ships  to 
dismantle  the  fortress  of  Socotra.' 

The  fall  of  the  important  city  of  Goa  brought  the 
^amorin  of  Calicut  to  the  feet  of  Afonso  Dalboquerque 
for  the  time,  and  his  offers  of  peace  resulted  in  the 
mission  of  Simfio  Rangel,  but  on  the  arrival  of  that 
ambassador  at  the  ^amorim’s  court  that  prince  had 
somewhat  recovered  from  his  alarm,  and  his  artifices 
Succeeded  in  protracting  negotiations,  which  were  not 
to  be  crowned  with  success  for  a long  time  yet  to  come, 

1 The  island  taken  possession  of  by  the  Portuguese  itv 
IflOf,  but  passed  from  the  possession  of  Portugal  to  that  of 
the  Sulftin  of  Keshin,  a small  territory  on  the  opposite  Arabian 
coast.  This  island  is  off  the  gulf  of  Aden,  situated  about  160 
miles  N.E.  from  Cape  Guardafum,  and  extends  about  seventy  or 
eighty  miles  from  west  to*east,  with  an  average  width  of  fifteen  or 
twenty  miles.  It  contains  1,300  square  miles,  consisting  chiefly 
of  a table  land,  which  is  between  700  or  800  feet  above  the  level 
of  the  sea.  North  and  south  of  the  table  land  are  two  plains. 
The  northern  plain  is  not  so  low  as  the  southern,  nor  so  level,  the 
surface  being  intersected  by  flat  valleys  in  many  places.  The 
western  districts  of  this  plain,  though  loss  sterile  than  the 
southern  plain,  are  more  adapted  for  pastures  than  for  culti- 
vation. The  eastern  districts  have  a superior  soil,  which  is  a 
reddish  earth,  covered  in  certain  seasons  with  abundant  grass,  and 
well  adapted  for  the  cultivation  of  grain,  fruit,  and  vegetables. 
In  most  of  the  northern  plains  water  is  found  at  a depth  of  from 
8 feet  to  10  fc^t  below  the  surface.  The  climate  is  sultry.  During 
the  north-east  monsoon  there  is  an  almost  daily  fall  of  rain.  The 
is  exposed  both  to  the  north-west  and  north-east  monsoons, 
rendering  the  anohoijiges  unsafe.  There  are  about  6,000  inhabit- 
•nts,  consisting  of  two  distinct ‘taces— namely,  Arabs  who  have 
settled  on«the  island,  and  the  sbpriginal  inhabitants,  who  are 
BedoninS,  wandering  from  one  part  of  the  island  to  another  with 
tbelr  flocks  and  herda  The  principa*  'commercial  products  are 
(does  of  the  finest  quality,  the  dsagon’s-blood  tree,  tamaribds, 


INTRODOOnOH. 


Mul  Afonso  Dalboqaerque  contented  witl^  a 

blockade  of  Calicut  by  a small  and  probably  inefficient 
fleets  which  was  compelled  by  the  disastrous  turn  of 
affairs  at  Goa  to  hasten  to  the  relief  of  the  besieged 
garrison  there. 

Another  Indian  potentate^  whose  policy  was  mant 
festly  disturbed  by  the  Portuguese  successes,  was  the 
King  of  Narsinga,  to  whom  Fray  Luiz  had  been  ac- 
credited by  Afonso  Dalboquerque  in  the  previous  year.* 
This  king  hastened,  after  some  tergiversation,  to  con- 
clude an  alliance  with  the  Portuguese  commander,  but 
Fray  Luiz  did  not  live  to  return,  being  murdered  at 
the  reported  instigation  of  the  HidalcAo.  * 

After  putting  the  local  government  of  the'  mtyi|^' 
island  of  Goa  into  a satisfactory  condition,  dedicipi^ 
the  principal  church  to  the  patronage  of  St.  Cathurkie, 

tobacco,  and  various  fruits  and  gums,  besides  some  cotton  attd 
indigo.  Sheep  and  goats  in  the  western  districts  constitute  the 
principal  wealth  of  the  inhabitants ; the  oxen  are  small.  The 
civet  cat  and  chameleon  are  found  all  over  the  island.  Turtles 
are  found  on  the  southern  coast.  Fish  abound  On  several  parts 
of  the  coast,  and  many  families  live  on  the  produce  of  their  fish- 
ing.  The -capital  is  Tamarida,  with  only  100  inhabitants,  built 
not  far  from  the  northern  shores. 

As  the  island  lies  almost  directly  in  the  line  of  our  communi- 
cation with  India  from  the  Red  Sea,  it  has  acquired  additional 
importance  by  the  construction  of  the  Suez  Canals  and  this  con- 
sideration has,  without  doubt,  determined  the  action  of  the  Itidian 
Government,  which,  in  1876,  entered  into  a treaty  by  which,  fbr 
a small  subsidy,  the  Sultan  engaged  never  to  cede  Socotra  to 
any  foreign  power,  nor  to  allow  any  settlement  t(f  be  made  on  it 
without  the  consent  of  th6  British  Government.  *^e 
Government  has  lately,  re-occupipd  the  island,  and  the  JBrit^ 
flag  was  rehoisted  there  not  long  ago. 

> See  vol.  II,  oh.  xvii.  * 


INTRODTTCTIOK. 


IX 


on  whose*  auapicioua  feast  day  be  had  gained  the 
victoiy,  appointing  various  officers,  munitioning  the 
fortress,  assisting  by  beneficent  measures  the  colonisa^ 
tion  of  the  lands,  and  re-establishing  the  currency,  it 
was  Afonso  Dalboquerque’s  intention  to  have  proceeded 
without  delay  to  the  Re^  Sea ; but  two  events  had 
transpired  which  caused  him  to  change  his  mind,  and 
this  change  was  productive  of  unexpectedly  great  and 
glorious  achievements,  which  added  new  lustre  to  the 
already  brilliant  career  of  the  Viceroy. 

One  of  the#B  w^s  the  circumstance  of  the  continued 
captivity  of  Ruy  de  Araujo  and  his  companions  in 
Malaca^gainst  the  advice  of  Ninachatu  (or  Ninapam, 
him),  the  Hindoo  adviser  of  the  king  of 
thiUf  country,  the  oth^r  the  natural  desire  of  Dioga 
Mendez  de  Vasconcelos,  w^o  had  come  from  Portugal 
under  special  orders  to  efiect  the  release  of  these 
prisoners,  to  make  his  way  thither  without  delay, 
although  Afonso  Dalboquerque,  in  the  exercise  of  his 
undoubted  authority,  desired  to  put  off  this  under- 
taking for  a more  convenient  opportunity,  when  a more 
imposing  force  than  that  which  Diogo  Mendez  de  Vas- 
concelos commanded  could  be  mustered  for  the  service. 
The  determined  intention  and  endeavour  of  Diogo 
Mendez  to  separate  from  the  fleet  of  his  superior 
officer,  in  direct  opposition  to  orders,  did  not  succeed 
at?  the  time,  yet  Jhis  act  undoubtedly  operated  .with 
some  weighfj  in  influencing  the  subsequent  movements 
of  i^nsoTDalboquer  who,  finding  the  winds  adverse 
lb  to  the  Rfed  Sea,  reversed  his 

‘ and  after  a brief  stoppage  at  Cochim,  shaped 

m.  Ill, 


c 


X IHTOODOOtlOX. 

hk  way  as  straight  as  he  could  for  Malaoa,  aud  brought 
up  his  fleet  at  Pedir,  on  the  northern  coast  of  Sumatra, 
At  this  port  the  hopes  of  the  Portuguese  were  raised 
in  a remarkable  degree  by  the  unexpected  meeting 
with  JoSo  Yiegas  and  eight  other  members  of  the  little 
band  under  the  headship  of  ^uy  de  Araujo,  that  had 
escaped  from  their  durance  at  Malaca.  These  men 
pointed  out  to  Afonso  Dalboquerque  the  complicity  of 
the  Moor  Naodabegea  or  Naodabeguea  in  the  plot  to 
destroy  Diogo  Lopez  de  Sequeira  and  his  retreat  t6 
J*ac4,  a neighbouring  port  at  which^  the  Portuguese 
fleet  touched,  and  made  ineffectual  efforts  to  getiim 
into  the  hands  of  the  commander.  But  on  the  advance 
of  the  fleet  towards  the  waters  of  Malaca  the  Moor 
was  overtaken  in  a pangajaoa,  and  after  a sharp 
encounter,  in  which  the  enemy  were  w’orsted,  the 
curious  spectacle  of  the  fugitive  Naodabegea,  severely 
wounded  and  nearly  dead,  but  without  any  blood  flow- 
ing from  his  mangled  body,  presented  itself  to  the 
astonished  eyes  of  the  Portuguese.  Thk  apparently 
unaccountable  circumstance  was  explained  by  the  find- 
ing of  a bracelet  made  of  the  bones  of  the  animal 
called  cabal,  a word  which  appears  to  be  related  some- 
what too  transparently  with  that  signifying  horse  in 
many  European  languages.  The  poculiac  power  pos- 
sessed by  this  bracelet  of  preventing  the  flow  of  blood 
from  any  wounds  which  the  wearer .sliould  experfeiiiM. 
recalls  the  incident  of  tHh  ma^ic  scabbard  of  Eii% 
Arthur’s  sword,  Excalibur.  ,Tn  the  Afort^d^4-fthw 
we  read : " ‘ Well,’  said  the  damsel,  ‘ go  ye  into  yondek 
barge,  and  row  youtseli^  unto  the  sword,  and 


tOTRODtrcrrroN. 


XI 


ftiid  the  »cabt^  with  you' So  King  Arthur  and 

Merlin  alighted,  tied  their  horses  to  two  trees,  and  so 
they  went  into  the  barge.  And  when  they  came  to 
the  sword  that  the  hand  held,  King  Arthur  took  it  up 

by  the  handles,  and  took  it  with  him and  so  came 

to  the  land  and  rode  fortji.  King  Arthur  looked  upon 
the  sword  and  liked  it  passing  wtII.  ‘ Whether  liketh 
you  better,'  said  Merlin,  ‘ the  sword  or  the  scabbard  V 
*Me  liketh  better  the  sword,'  said  King  Arthur.  ‘ Yc 
Ire  more  unwise,'  said  Merlin,  ‘ for  the  scabbard  is 
wortji  ten  of  th^8Word,/or  while  ye  have  the  scabbard, 
npUn  you  ye  shall  lose  no  blood,  he  ye  never  so  sore 
WOunSed,  therefore  keep  well  the  scabbard  always  with 
ijou^  This  strangely  gifted  bracelet  was  sent  by 
Afonso  Dalboquerque  to  the  King  of  Portugal,  but  was 
lost  on  the  voyage,  with  other  unwonted  evidences 
of  his  prowess,  and  rare  trophies  of  Portuguese  valour 
over  the  unknown  races  of  the  Eastern  world. 

After  the  incident  of  capturing  a junk,  on  board  of 
which  #’as»the  King  of  Pac^,  who  was  evidently 
making  the  best  of  his  way  to  Malaca  to  warn  the 
king  of  the  propinquity  of  the  hostile  Armada,  Malaca 
was  reached,  and  negotiations  were  immediately  com- 
menced  for  the  restitution  of  the  Portuguese  captives, 
and  for  satirfaction  of  the  insult  done  to  that  nation  by 
their  detention ; but  this  only  resulted  in  the  king 
temporising  with  Afonso  Dalboquerque  while  he  sccredy 
made  exterfsive  preparations  to  withstand  his  demands. 
At  this  point  the  author  of  the  Commentaries  breaks 
^ for  the  moment  the ' thread  *of  his  narrative,  and 
devotes  a chapter  to  a bistotical  digression  upon  the 


iKtBOBUCnON. 


i^ii 

Bite  tod  foundation  of  the  kingdom  and  city  of  Malaca, 
and  another  chapter  to  a description  of  the  customs 
and  government  of  the  city.  We  may  here,  in  like 
manner  for  the  moment  so  far  digress,  as  to  glance  at 
the  impression  made  by  Malaca,  in  its  present  phase  Sf 
existence,  upon  the  learned  Mr.  Wallace,  in  his  most 
interesting  work  on  the  Malay  Archipelago.  Writing 
in  1869  the  author  says  : — 

At  present^  a vessel  over  a hundred  tons  hardly  ever  ■ 
enters  its  port,  and  the  trade  is  entirely  confined  to  a few 
petty  products  of  the  forests,  and  to  tl^p  Miit  which  the 
trees  planted  by  the  old  Portuguese  now  produce  for^the 
enjoyment  of  the  inhabitants  of  Singapore.  AJthodgh 
rather  subject  to  fevers,  it  is  not  at  present  considered  very 
unhealthy. 

**  The  population  of  Malacca  consists  of  several  races. 
The  ubiquitous  Chinese  are  perhaps  the  most  numerous, 
keeping  up  their  manners,  customs,  and  language;  the  in- 
digenous Malays  are  next  in  point  of  numbers,  and  their 
language  is  the  Lingua-franca  of  the  place.  Next  come  the 
descendants  of  the  Portuguese — a mixed,  degraded,  and 
degenerate  race,  but  who  still  keep  up  the»use  of  their 
mother-tongue,  though  ruefully  mutilated  in  grammar;  and 
then  there  are  the  English  rulers,  and  the  descendants  of 
the  Dutch,  who  all  speak  English.  The  Portuguese  spoken 
at  Malacca  is  a useful  philological  phenomenon.  The  verbs 
have  mostly  lost  their  inflections,  and  one  form  does  for  all 
moods,  tenses,  numbers,  and  persons.  Eu  vai^serves  for  * I 
go^  * 1 wenP,  or  ' I will  go^  Adjectives,  too,  have  been 
deprived  of  their  feminine  and  plural  terminations,  so  that 
the  language  is  reduced  to  a marvellous  simplicity,  and, 
with  the  admixture  of  a fgw  Malay  •words,  becoquies  rather 
puzzling  to  one  who  has  heard  o^y  the  pure  Lusitaifian. 

^ Alfred  R.  W allace,  77*e  Malay  Loudon,  8rb., 

ft69,  pp.  41,  42.  ' 


INTRODUCTION. 


xiii 

eoitrae,  these  several  peoples  are  as  varied  as  in 
their  speech.  The  English  preserve  the  tight<£tting  coat, 
waistcoat^  and  trousers^  and  the  abominable  hat  and  cravat; 
the  Portngaese  patronise  a light  jacket^  or,  more  frequently, 
shirt  and  trousers  only;  the  Malays  wear  their  national 
jacket  and  sarong  (a  kind  of  kilt),  with  loose  drawers ; while 
the  Chinese  never  depart  the  least  from  their  national 
dress,  which  indeed  it  is  impossible  to  improve  for  a tropi- 
Cfd  climate,  whether  as  regards  comfort  or  appearance.  The 
loosely-hanging  trousers,  and  neat,  white  half  shirt  half 
jacket,  are  exactly  what  a dress  should  be  in  this  low  lati- 

iSie  testimony^also  of  the  gifted  author  of  a recent ' 
woi^  upon  the  Straits  of  Malaca  may  be  here  perused 
with  advantage,  for  its  characteristic  touches  upon  the 
state  of  the  settlement  in  1875.  Mr,  J,  Thomson 
says 

**  I paid  a passing  visit'  to  Malacca,  bat  finding  it  neither 
an  interesting  nor  a profitable  field,  I made  but  a short  stay 
in  the  place.  Malacca  is  a quaint,  dreamy,  Dutch-looking 
old  town,  where  one  may  enjoy  good  fruit,  and  the  fellow- 
ship and  hospitality  of  the  descendants  of  the  early  Portu- 
guese and  Dutch  colonists. 

''  Should  any  warmhearted  bachelor  wish,  ho  might 
furnish  himself  with  a pretty  and  attractive  looking  wife 
from  among  the  daughters  of  that  sunny  clime;  hut  lot  him 
make  no  long  stay  there  if  indisposed  to  marry,  unless  he 
can  defy  the  aip^itchery  of  soft  dark  eyes,  of  raven  tresses, 

* J.  Thomson,  F.R.G.S.,  The  Straits  of  Malacca^  Indo-Ckina^ 
GUna.  London, *1875,  8Y0.,jPp.  52,  53.  For  further  infor- 
tbation  upon  Malacca  and  .the  adjacent  countries  and  islands,  the 
with  advantage^ the  work  by  J.  H.  Moor,  on 
Singapore,  183jf,  4to. ; Newbold,  JSrttisA 
of  1839  ; Crawford,  Dictimar^  iht  Indian 


INTKODUCTION. 


xiv 

and  of  sylph^ike  forms.  It  is  a spot  where  leistire  seems  to 
sit  at  every  man^s  doorway;  drowsy  as  the  placid  sea/ and 
idle  as  the  huge  palms  whose  broad  leaves  nod  above  the 
old  weather-beaten  sraug-looking  houses.  Here  Nature 
comes  laden  at  each  recurring  season  with  ripe  and  luscious 
fruits,  dropping  them  from  her  lap  into  the  very  streets, 
and  bestrewing  the  byeways  w\|ih  glorious  bananas  on  which 
even  the  fat  listless  porkers  in  their  wayside  walks^  will 
hardly  deign  to  feed.  It  is  withal  a place  where  one  might 
loiter  away  a life,  dreamily,  pleasantly,  and  uselessly.  These 
are  but  passing  impressions,  and  Malacca  may  yet,  after  all, 
develop  into  something  in  every  way  worthy  of  the  straits 
^ which  bear  its  name.^^ 

In  this  chapter  also  the  author  of  the  Commenthries 
has  put  on  record  some  early  and  interesting  informa- 
tion concerning  the  inhabitants  of  Lequea,  or  the  Loo- 
choo  Islands,  who  arc  there  called  Gores  and  maintained 
considerable  trade  with  the  Malay  settlements  in  the 
peninsula.  These  islands  have  lately  become  somewhat 
prominent  in  Asiatic  politics,  in  consequence  of  the  dis- 
agreement between  China  and  Japan,  produced  by  the 
forcible  seizure  of  them  by  the  latter  pow^r. 

The  Politische  Correspondenz  gives  ah  official  review 
of  the  dispute  betweeh  China  and  Japan  regarding  the 
Loo-choo  Islands,  in  a letter  from  Shanghai  dated 
July  18,  1879.  It  says  : — 

#> 

'^The  Japanese  Government  took  possession  with  a mili* 
tary  force  of  the  Loo-Choo  Islands  last  April,  and  trass* 
ported  its  Governor,  who  ca^ed  himself  a King,  and  yearly 
paid  tribute  both  to  China*  and /apan,  to^  Yeddo.  He ' 

^ With  respect  to  the  relatitms  of  the  Lo6-0hoo  Empire  to 
China,  it  is  proved  from  Chinese  historical  works  that  even  in'  the 
earliest  times,  during  the  r%uB  of  the  Emperors  of  the  dyuaiSty  ' 


IWTBODUCTION.  XV 

h^0  received  tho  rank  and  mcorae  of  a Japanese  Prince. 
At  th.0  *»anje  time  he  was  replaced  by  a Japanese  Governor, 
and  the  whole  country  placed  under  Japanese  control ; the 
paying  of  tribute  to  China  was  stopped,  and  the  Chinese 
system  of  a calculation  of  time  was  replaced  by  the 
Japanese  calendar.^  All  these  changes  were  so  well  pre- 
pared, so  quickly  carried  ontj  that  they  were  only  known 
after  they  had  actually  taken  place,  although  at  the  time 
doubted.  ' Everybody  was  curious  to  know  what  stops  the 
Chinese  would  take  in  the  matter. 

“ The  little  Loo-Choo  Empire  extends  between  20  and 
30  degrees  of  latitude,  in  a north-eastern  direction,  from 
the  northern  lend  of  Formosa  to  the  southern  end  of 
Japan!  It  is  composed  of  over  three  hundred  little  islands, 
and^dinded  into  three  large  groups,  called  Tshung-shan, 
Shan-uatt,  and  Shan-pei.  This  geographical  arrangement 
is  also  the  political  arrangement,  as  the  threo  groups 
form  the  three  provinces  of  the  Empire,  which  are  again 
divided  into  thirty-five  districts,  and  these  into  378  parishes. 
The  capital  town,  at  the  same  time  the  former  residence  of 
the  Prince,  is  Ewang,  on  tho  Tshung-shan.  Of  the  number 
of  the  inhabitants  nothing  positive  is  known,  but  they  are 
a peace-loving  people,  cultivating  their  land  and  carrying 
on  cattle  breeding.  Their  habits  and  dress  are  similar  to 
those  of  the  Chinese.  They  write  in  Chinese  characters, 
but  the  common  dialect  is  similar  to  the  Japanese.  Bo- 
garding  the  real  history  of  the  people  nothing  at  all  is 
known. 

“The  Loo-Choo  Islands  were  tho  causes  of  continual 


Han,  the  Princes  of  tho  Loo-Choo  Islands  paid  their  tribute  to 
China.  In  the  nineteenth  year  of  the  reign  of  the  Emperor  Kaughi 
(1681),  the  tribute  tp  be  sent  was  settled  as  follows; — 12,600 
catties  of  sulphur,  3,000  musoh^^,  and  30,000  catties  of  copper. 
One  cattio  k 1 L31b.  English.  • 

1$72  of  the  Christian  caloalation,  the  Chinese  caleixliir 
has  be^  in  use  on  the  Loo-Chdo  Islaiuife*  the  years  being  named 
knd  Numbered  according  to  the  Chinese  Emperors. 


xn 


INTRODUCTION. 


quarrel  betireen  China  and  Japan  in  earlier  times,  the  latter 
haring  repeatedly  tried  to  annex  this  little  island-empire. 
In  the  nineteenth  year  of  the  reign  of  the  Emperor  Wan4i 
(1592),  a number  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  Loo-Choo  islands 
were  delegated  to  China  to  complain  of  Japan’s  attempts  to 
annex  the  islands  by  force.  These  efforts,  as  well  as  others 
made  in  1606,  were  frustrated.  Yang-Tsung  Ye,  the  Chinese 
Commander-in-Chief  of  the  province  Chekiang,  brought 
(also  in  Wan-li's  reign  in  1613)  the  Prince  of  the  Loo-Choo 
Islands,  who  governed  then,  and  who  had  been  forcibly 
carried  off  by  the  Japanese,  back  again  into  his  kingdom. 

“ It  is  not  to  be  doubted  that,  although  the  Chinese  are 
able  to  prove  historically  a certain  Suzerainty© over  the  Loo- 
choo  Islands,  the  Japanese  can  also  do  the  same;  in  fact, 
both  Empires  have  hitherto  considered  the  Loo-Choo  islands 
a state  dependent  on  them;  both  the  Emperors  o?  China 
and  of  Japan  style  themselves  Suzerain  of  tho  Loo-Choo 
Islands,  and  it  will  have  to  be  proved  which  of  the  two  is 
able  to  prove  supremacy  and  to  keep  it. 

When  the  news  of  the  seizing  of  the  Loo-Choo  islands 
by  Japan  reached  Pekin,  great  surprise  and  dissatisfaction 
was  shown  among  the  supporters  of  the  Government.  A 
few  days  earlier  the  new  Japanese  Ambassador  at  Pekin 
had  presented  his  credentials  without  taking^  advantage  of 
the  occasion  to  say  a word.  On  Prince  Kung  and  the 
Ministers  of  the  Tsungli-Yamen  appealing  to  him  regarding 
the  action  of  his  Government,  he  replied  that  he  was,  with 
regard  to  this  question,  without  any  instructions  whatever. 
The  Japanese  Government,  in  answer  to  the  Chinese  Am- 
bassador’s appeal  at  Yeddo,  replied  that  they  jrere  ready  to 
prove  at  any  time  their  right  to  the  Loo-Choo  Islands,  and 
that  a giving  up  of  them  could  never  be  thought  of.  Japan, 
who  only  would  yield  what  slje  had  takefti  by  force  of  arms, 
to  do  which  China  has  not  the  means,^  having  nfiither  money, 
an  army,  and,  least  of  all,*a  fleet.  **  « 

‘'From  authentic  quarters. it  is  affirmed  that  Prince 
Kung  conferred  with  ex-President  Grant,  who  visited 


INTRODITGTION. 


xvii 


Pekin  lately,  on  this  qaestion.  Prince  Kung  begged  his 
intervention.  General  Grant  may  have  given  his  word  to 
introdnce  this  subject  in  a private  conversation,  but  not 
officially,  as  the  General  in  his  retired  position  would  un- 
doubtedly avoid  even  exercising  a seaming  induenoe  on  the 
politics  of  the  present  Government  of  the  United  States. 

^^In  Pekin,^  according  to  the  latest  news,  the  excite- 
ment seems  to  be  on  the  increase;  the  Ministers  of  the 
Tsnngli-Yam^n  speak  of  war  between  China  and  Japan,  but 
they  at  the  same  time  make  it  known  that  they  will  first 
call  in  the  intervention  of  the  Foreign  Powers,  hoping  thus 
to  attain  restitution  of  their  original  position;  But  whether 
such  an  intorvtjntion,  in  case  of  hostilities  really  breaking 

9 • 

^ I ha^e  extracted  this  from  the  Standard^  which,  at  the  time, 
published  the  following  remarks  upon  the  situation  of  affairs : — 
“The  cloud  which  arose  six  months  ago  between  China  and  Japan, 
in  consequence  of  the  seizure  by  the  latter  of  the  Loo-choo  Islands, 
has  not  yet  cleared  oft'  In  fact,  it  may  be  said  that,  despite  the 
hope  prevailing  among  the  European  communities  in  the  far  Eixst, 
it  has  grown  thicker  in  the  months  that  have  elapsed  since  the 
Loo-Choo  question  first  attracted  attention.  Nor  does  this  afford 
any  just  ground  for  surprise.  For  centuries  the  Chinese  have 
exemsed  rights  over  the  Prince  of  those  Islands ; neither  Japan 
nor  any  other  Power  has  ever  challenged  thorn;  but  suddenly 
they  discovered  that  the  Mikado  of  Japan  had  taken  possession  of 
the  islands,  deposed  the  Ruler,  and  nominated  a Governor  of  his 
own.  He  has  since  justified  the  seizure  by  asserting  that  the  Loo- 
Choo  Islands  have  always  been  tributary  to  the  Prince  of  Satsuma, 
the  groat  feudatory  of  Kinshin,  who  was  finally  overthrown  in 
1877.  The  Mftnehu  dynasty  has  never  been  remarkable  for  its 
indiffe^noe,  nor,  indeed,  has  any  of  its  predecessors  upon  tho 
Throne  of  Pekin,  to  the  rights  which  it  has  acquired ; and  tho 
Japanese  Qovernmenf  took  tbifi^  step  at  a moment  when  the 
Chinese  had  gfven  signal  ^proof  not  only  of  their  determination 
not  to  ab^te  one  jot  of  their  pretensions,  but  also  of  their  ability 
to  enforce  them.  It  is  true  that  moi^ks  have  passed  since  the 
tidings  reached  China  that  a Japanese  garrison  held  Loo-Ch6o, 
and  fliat  a Japanese  fleet  was  riding  in  the  roadstead  of  Napa- 
lU.  d 


xnxi 


INTBODUCnON. 


out,  Would  bo  grantod  ia  difficult  to  predict.  Anyhow,  the 
attitude  of  China  to  England  in  the  serious  difficulties 
between  China  and  Japan  some  years  ago  regarding  For- 
mosa is  too  fresh  in  people's  memory  not  to  be  profitably 
used  at  the  present  time. 

^'The  inhabitants  of  the  Loo-Choo  Islands  are  said  to 
have  sent  a deputation  to  Pekin  to  beg  her  direct  help  in 
their  favour.  The  Japanese  consuls  in  the  Chinese  ports 
have  received  orders  by  telegraph  to  seize  the  members  of 
the  deputations  on  their  appearing  and  send  thena  back 
to  Japan.  A Japanese  corvette  is  now  at  Shanghai,  and 
two  other  Japanese  men-of-war  are  cruising  about  in  Chinese 
^ waters.  In  case  of  this  news  being  true,  the  deputation 

kiang  without  l>eholding  a Chinese  fleet  and  army  being  despatched 
to  reassert  the  Imperial  authority.  But  it  is  not  iu  accordance 
with  Chinese  habits  to  be  precipitate,  even  if  the  supposed  effici- 
ency of  the  Japanese  fleet  were  not  an  additional  incentive  to 
caution.  The  latest  official  announcement  is  one  fully  in  oouso- 
nancQ  with  the  train  of  thought  of  the  official  Chinese  mind.  A 
despatch  has  been  sent  to  the  Mikado  informing  him  that,  unless 
the  Japanese  forces  ore  withdrawn,  and  Loo-Choo  restored  to  its 
old  state  of  semi-independence  and  double  vassalage  to  China  and 
Japan,  within  the  space  of  three  months,  he  must  take  the  coti- 
sequences.  The  Japanese  are  anxious  to  have  tbe  matter  sub- 
mitted to  either  a mixed  Commission  or  to  an  arbitrator,  knowing 
well  that  Europeans,  and  Englishmen  in  particular,  have  little 
sympathy  with  the  claims  China  possesses,  and  periodically  ad- 
vances, over  most  of  the  States  of  Eastern  Asia.  The  Tokio 
authorities  perceive  that,  in  the  eyes  of  most  foreigners,  China's 
grievance  with  regard  to  Loo-Choo  is  sentimental^  for  the  Pekiu 
Government  does  not  demand  the  surrender  of  the  islands.*  Faor, 
from  that,  it  wi8l\ps  to  ensure  their  autonomy,  only  demanding 
the  perpetuation  of  the  nominartie  and  of  the  fiuctiuttiog  tribute 
which  have  constituted  Loo-Choo  in  its  eyes  %^^r^^  of  the 
Celestial  Empire.  There  ard  deep^  motives  behind, ^and  under^ 
neath  all  this  talk  ab<mt  the  there  is  a very  clear  per- 
ception of  the  fact  that  the  Loo-Choo  question  is  oae  of  praotieal 
importance.’' 


INTRODUCmON. 


xix 


have  snocoeded  in  landing  on  some  place  on  the  coast, 
and  making  their  way  to  Pekin, ^ where,  however,  they  have 
not  yet  arrived.  Leaving  aside  the  question  of  the  right  of 
possession,  it  is  not  to  be  denied  that  the  Japanese  have 
shown  great  skill  and  energy  in  carrying  out  their  purpose, 
and  an  exact  knowledge  of  Chinese  affairs.  China  will  bo 


^ **  At  Pekin  it  is  evident  that  the  Japanese  occupation  of  the 
Islands  constitutes  a grave  danger  to  China.  An  insult  of  such 
a venial  character  to  the  Imperial  dignity  might  be  tolerated ; 
but  a menace  to  the  nation  must  be  grappled  with,  so  that  it  shall 
not  develope  into  an  actual  peril.  It  is  on  this  poiut  that  some- 
thing may,  with  advantage,  be  said  at  the  present  time,  when 
various  oircumstancds  are  calculated  to  put  the  Japanese  view  so 
pronftnently  forward  that  the  Chinese  claims  may  be  lost  sight  of. 
The  gist*bf  the  difference  lies  in  the  question,  why  is  tho  Japanese 
occupation  of  Loo-Choo  dangerous  to  the  peace  of  China.  Be- 
tween China  and  Japan  there  has  been  for  centuries  a rivalry,  not 
very  dissimilar  to*  that  which  existed  for  a long  time  between 
France  and  England.  The  introduction  of  Western  ideas,  arts, 
and  manufactures  into  the  two  oountries,  far  from  allaying  the 
keenness  of  the  rivalry,  had  ratlier  the  effect  of  embittering  it. 
The  ve^  eagerness  shown  by  the  Japanese  to  acquire  gun  boats 
and  improved  .weapons  was  a grievance  in  the  eyes  of  the  con- 
servative Chinese,  for  they  felt  that  their  neighbours  would  test 
their  naval  and  militaiy  efficiency  either  upon  them  or  against 
some  of  their  outlying  possessiona  The  example  set  by  the 
Japanese  proved  contagious,  however,  and  there  is  good  reason  for 
believing  that  the  Celestials  have  now,  mainly  through  the  energy 
of  the  Viceroy  Li-Hung-Chang,  caught  up  with  their  progressive 
neighbour,  so  9ur  as  the  purchase  of  men  of  war,  rifles,  and  im- 
proved artillery  can  be  said  to  constitute  progress.  For  militaiy 
pHtrposes  the  two  States  may  be  admitted  tg  be  much  on  an 
equality,  provided  the  numerous  responsibilities  of  the  Pekin 
Qovernin<iht  dt  j(^t  detract  from  ?ts  vigour  at  the  critical  moment. 

. Ai  s^tdt  tkne,  the  advantage  of  position  undoubtedly  lies  with 
Jipiov  and  ihU  would  enable  her  fleet ^tP  prosecute  an  offensive 
war  on  the  aaposed  seaboard  of  China  with  very  considerable 
V effiioi.  The  occupation  of  Loo-Chod  further  improves  that  posi- 


nmioDUCTioN. 


quite  as  inoapftble  of  taking  the  islands  from  Japan  as  she 
was  in  preventing  her  from  seizing  them.  Even  Japan 
may,  after  these  first  successful  efiPorts,  at  no  very  distant 
time  take  steps  to  occupy  Formosa,  where  new  sources  of 
wealth,  exhausted  in  her  own  country,  are  to  be  found  in 
rich  abundanco.^^  ^ 


tion,  for  the  excellent  harbour  of  Napakiang  in  its  Sheltered  bay 
provides  the  Mikado’s  fleet  with  a station  on  the  flank  of  the 
Eastern  and  Yellow  Seas,  within  two  days’  steaming. of  the  coasts 
of  Fuhkien  and  Chekiang.  But  it  has  further  advfljntages  which 
have  not  been  mentioned,  and  prominent  among  them  must  be 
held  to  be  that  the  possession  of  the  Loo-Choot  Islands  carries 
with  it  that  of  the  little-known  Madjicoscmafii  group.  This  latter 
lies  off  the  east  coast  of  Formosa,  and  has  enjoyed  in  the  efes  of 
the  neighbouring  countries  a semi-sacred  reputation,  n&t  widely 
different  to  that  held  by  the  Hosperides  in  ihe  mythology  of 
ancient  Greece,  The  two  largest  of  the  group  are  Paohuran  and 
Typinsan ; and  the  coast  of  Formosa  is  less  than  one  hundred  and 
fifty  miles  distant  from  the  former.  It  thus  appears  that  the 
apparently  harmless  act  of  the  Japanese  in  deposing  the  king  of 
Loo-Cboo  has  resultediBn  their  acquisition  of  two  groups  of  islands, 
representing  a tract  of  territory  as  large  as  England  and  Wales, 
and  having  a commanding  position  in  waters  which  have  always 
been  considered  to  he  Chinese.  A glance  at  the«map  will  suffice 
to  show  that  the  Mikado  has  now  obtained  ^ssession  of  two  ad« 
zuirable  halting-places  on  the  road  to  Formosa  and  the  China 
coast.  By  the  acquisition  of  Napakiang  he  has  supplemented  the 
value  of  his  own  western  harbours,  and  there  is  no  reason  for 
supposing  that  Paohnsan  does  not  contain  convenient  bays  and 
safe  roadsteads.  These  facts  should  show  tha^  the  Loo^Choo 
question  is  one  not  of  sentiment  alone  to  the  ^inese,  but  of 
serious  practical  igiport.  Unfamiliar  as  the  names  of  these  places 
may  be  to  ua  they  are  well  known  in  the  Jhistory  of  China,  and 
the  Pekin  rulers  are  aware  tha^  as  they  have  in  past  times  excr^ 
cised  considerable  influence  eu  the  resblt  of  wars  between  Gh^ 
and  Japan,  it  is  quite  probable'^ that  they  would  do  so  again  in 
any  future  struggle.  * 

“The  hostile  policy  which  Japan  has  always  pursued  towards 


INTRODUOTIOK. 


Negotiations  with  the  King  of  Malaca  having  failed, 
Afonso  Dalboquerque  made  extensive  preparations  for 
resorting  to  force,  and,  as  a preliminary  step,  attracted 
to  his  side  a merchant  fleet  of  five  Chinese  junks,  having 
a force  on  board  which  the  King  of  Malaca  was  about 

China,  her  mtriguea  in  Corea,  and  expeditions  to  Formosa,  have 
kept  the  yigilance  of  the  Celestials  constantly  on  the  alert.  Ll- 
Ilnng'Chaug  now  beholds  the  Mikado,  strong  in  his  new  freedom 
and  liberated  from  the  dread  of  his  arrogant  Daimios,  stretching 
out  his  hand  to  the  north  and  to  the  south  for  the  purpose  of 
extending  his  ii^uenoe  and  curtailing  that  of  China.  Within  the 
last  few  months  Ja^  has  committed  two  acts  which  will  further 
incehse  her  rival.  The  one  is  the  occupation  of  the  Loo>Choo 
and  MaBjicosemah  Islands,  which  brings  her  close  to  Formosa,  the 
Chinese  Ireland,  and  the  other  is  the  signature  of  a 'Treaty  with 
the  King  of  Corea,  which  gives  Japanese  subjects  special  privi- 
leges in  that  country.  The  Mikado  has  thus  not  restricted  his 
aggressive  policy  to  the  sea.  His  alliance  with  the  ruler  of  the 
peninsula  of  Corea  gives  him  a foothold  on  the  mainland,  which 
acquires  special  signifioance  from  the  reopmbranoe  of  the  siege 
of  Nankin  and  triumphs  on  the  Yangtse  by  the  Japanese  in  the 
sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries.  These  considerations,  and 
othera  of  a similar  kind,  make  it  very  in)probablo  that  the  Chinese 
will  acquiesce  in  the  most  recent  achievement  brought  about  by 
the  aggressive  policy  of  Japan.  To  them  it  will  appear  to  be  a 
bad  policy  to  show  weakness  with  regard  to  Loo-Choo.  The 
Japanese  are  the  aggressors.  Theyjiavo  no  sufficient  excuse  for 
their  seizure  of  this  group,  and  they  have  for  years  followed  a 
systematic  poljoy  which  would,  if  China  continued  as  indifferent 
as  she  is  now  counselled  by  some  of  her  friends  to  xemain,  load 
to  the  loss  of  every  island  she  possesses  b^ond  the  immediate 
vicinity  of  her  Bhoi;ps.  If  Sir  Thomas  Wale,  or  some  other 
leading  authority  on  the  spot,  t»uinot  induce  the  Japaneie  to 
withdraw,  4he  Chinese  will,'  beyond  question,  take  the  matter 
into  the&  own  hands,  and  at  the  fitting  moment  endeavour  to 
expel  the  Japanese  f^om  the  islands  Irhich  they  have  seized.’* 


INTBODUOTION. 


xxii 

to  employ  in  military  operations  against  the  King  of 
Bara  or  Aru,*  a state  on  the  coast  of  Sumatra,  nearly 
opposite  the  port  of  Malaca,  with  which  he  was  at 
war. 

On  the  feast  day  of  St.  James  the  Greater  the  storm- 
ing of  the  bridge  or  pier  was  made,  under  circum- 
stances narrated  in  the  text,  and  a great  part  of  the 
city  fired.  These  operations,  although  they  did  not 
result  immediately  in  the  fall  of  the  city,  severely 
harrassed  the  enemy,  and  crippled  his  resources.  The 
author  of  Malaca  Conquistada  records  the  subsequent 
attack  upon  and  destruction  of  the  city  by  fire  in  toeso 
stanzas. 


“ Em  tanto  das  jancllas,  e terrados, 

Que  para  aqiiella  parte  respondiao, 

Mil  frechas,  mil  pelouros  desraandados 
Sobre  a gento  ChriatS  mortes  choviao : 

Mas,  chamando  Albuquerf^ue  aos  esfor^ados 
Lima  e C^deira,  i-quelles  quo  regiSo, 

Lhes  mandou  que  do  fogo  as  mSos  arnmsseni, 

E que  as  yizinhas  casas  abnizassem. 

“ Manda  tambera  o Malavar  valento 
Que  com  os  ecus  adustos  tiradores 
Impida  o assoroarse  a imiga  gente 
As  partes,  que  Ihe  ficSo  superiores. 

Da  empreza  o forte  bai’baro  content e 
Os  sous  iucita  a bellicos  furores ; 

Mil,  e mil  frechas  logo  os  ares  oalKo, 

Tro90)  de  breados  oabos  fogo  exhalao. 

♦ 

^ 

# 

^ The  initial  “D”hcre,  as^n  Dups  tower  down,  is  |lainlj  only 
the  Portuguese  preposition  (k  in^oombinatiom  The  plac6 
as  Daru  in  the  Portolaa^ibf  Femfto  Vaz  Dourado,  and  as  An*  ia 
the  map  given  by  the  Dutch  translator  of  JoSo  de  Borros. 


IISTRODUCTION. 


xxiii* 


**  DAo  ao  maudato  effeito ; poga  o fogo 
Na  disposta  materia : com  tremenda 
Furia  vibrantes  pontas  sobem  logo 
Aoa  ares,  e de  fUmo  nuvem  horronda  : 

Grita  a miaera  genie  ; por6m  rogo 
N&o  admitte  a voraz  ohatnma,  contenda 
Com  as  nuvens  horrisona  travaudo, 

As  e8f6ras  mais  altaS  atnea^ando. 

“ Eolo  neste  ponto  desatava 
Da  formosa  Orithia  o bravo  amante, 

Com  que  o inoondio  cruel  mais  so  esfor^ava, 
Com  horrivel  estrondo  orepitante. 

ConAa  o fogo  roniedios  mil  buscava 
A Paga  genie,  mas  nenhum  bastanio, 

Que  0*0  vento  de  casa  em  casa  prende, 

£,  coLisumindo  aqui,  1&  so  accendo. 

“ Edificio,  em  grandeza,  e valor  raro, 

Sobre  secretas  rodas  se  movia, 

Finge  a materia  o raarmore  do  Paro 
Illusire  c*o  metal,  quo  Arabia  cria. 

Nolle,  86  Ihe  nSo  fora  o fado  avaro, 

Da  Infante  as  bodas  celebrar  queria 
O Rei,  e com  alegre  variedade 
Carfo  triunfante  dar  vista  & oidado. 

**  A nupcial  casa,  de  delioias  chda, 

Tambem  se  atrtfve  o vingativo  lume, 

£ na  materia  rica  assi  se  at6a, 

Que  em  leve  fumo,  e cinza  em  dm  a resume  : 
Delia  a mesquita,  onde  com  torpe  e f&a 
Adorac^o,  e barbaro  costume, 

Ao  vil  Mafoma  hoiirava  a genie  cega, 

A flamma^^rdeute  em  ^onsumir  se  emprega. 

• 

mesquita  esquadriU)  oofifuso  acode, 

£ prooura  atalhar  o fogo.  tanto 
Vendo  o prudente  Affonso  que  nSo  pode 
Cansada  a genie  com  ti*abalho  tanto ; 


INTRODUCTION. 


XXIV 

Porquo  0 intento  ao  poasivel  w aooommode; 

Em  quaoio  o incendlo  dura,  e creoe  o prauto, 

A artilharla  embaroar  manda  ganhada, 

£ a quo  em  terra  ficou  deixa  onoravada. 

**  0 esquadrSo  militar  logo  oome^a 
A ir,  e vir,  despojos  embarcando, 

Como  no  eatio  com  ferronte  preaaa 
Multidao  de  formigaa,  saqueando 
Do  trigo  as  eiras,  monies  atraveasa 
Por  eiitre  ervaa,  o espinhos,  sustentando 
Na  boca  o grao  pezado,  at6  encei  mllo, 

E na  eatreita  caverna  outhosourallo. 

to 

Aa  barbaras  catervaa  oflendidaa, 

Quando  tanto  deapojo  ombarcar  virAo 
A dar  e recobir  novas  feridaa 
Bramando  vingativos  acodirao. 

Torna  de  novo  a morte  a troncar  vidas . 

Aqui  appellidao  Marie,  alii  suspirSo ; 

Em  fim  effeitos  crus  de  dura  guerra 
No  mar  ostentao,  porem  mais  na  terra. 

Rios  ooiTem  do  sangue  dorramado ; 

Que,  nas  ondas  entrando,  em  sanguinosa 
MudSo  a cor  cerulea  : de  ira  armado 
Se  0 rnesmo  furor,  vista  espantosa  I 
Mas  jd  dm  dava  ao  dia  o Sol  dourado 
Do  grande  Oceano  visitando  a esposa : 

Toma>8e  da  naus  a baptizada  genie ; 

A Agarena  o elemento  apaga  ardente.” 

Liv.  ix^at.  13444S. 

0 

The  Javanese  headman,  Utcmutaraja,  who  adminis* 
tered  the  suburban  distrtet  of  Upe  or  Dupe,’  made, 
overtures  of  service,  and  fpr  the  ‘time,  but  n<Jt  jrithout 
showing  Buspimons,*  which  -were  afterwards  verified, 

* See  p.  xxiL 


INTRODirCTION. 


XXV 


Afonso  Dalboquerquo  accepted  his  services.  la  the 
end,  probably  out  of  political  necessity  quite  as  much 
as  proved  guilt,  this  prince  was  convicted  of  treachery, 
and  executed  with  his  son  and  son-in-law,  as  an 
effectual  means  of  restoring  quiet  in,  and  manifesting 
the  Portuguese  power  o^er,  the  city.  The  Chinese, 
who  had  come  for  trading  purposes  in  their  junks, 
seized  this  opportunity  of  renewing  their  request  for 
permission  to  depart  on  the  prosecution  of  their  voyage 
to  Siam,  and  the  Portuguese  commander  gladly  availed 
himself  of  th?  occasion  to  send  Duarte  Fernandez  as 
amUssador  to  Siam  in  their  company. 

Afte?"  a characteristic  speech,  setting  forth  the  Im- 
perial policy  of  the  Portuguese  king,  Afonso  Dalbo- 
i|uerque  again  pushed  forward  in  full  strength,  as- 
saulted the  bridge,  and  made  good  his  position  upon 
it.  From  that  hour  the  fate  of  Malaca  was  scaled, 
and  soon  fell  an  easy  prey  into  the  hands  of  the 
commander,  who  thus  captured  in  a city  extending 
three  miles  along  the  shore,  and  of  great  depth  inland, 
an  incredible  amount  of  plunder  and  three  thousand 
pieces  of  artillery,  and  added  to  Portugal  a territory 
considerably  larger  than  the  mother  kingdom.  But 
the  King  of  Malaca,  although  in  full  flight,  was  yet  in 
hopes  of  rescuing  his  patrimony  from  the  foreign  in- 
vader, and  dispatched  his  own  uncle,  TuSo  Nacem 
Mudaliar,  to  the  King  of  China,  an  empire  at  that 
period  in  cldse  alliance  with  the  Afalay  king,  to  beg 
for  assistance.  Tuao  Nacem  made  his  way  to  Canton, 
and  from  that  port  was  conVeyed,Vccording  to  custom, 
to  Pekin ; but  the  King  of  China,  who  had  heard 
vot.  ui. 


INTKOBUCTION. 


xxvi 

of  the  friendly  treatment  accorded  by  Afonso  Dalbo- 
querque  (for  this  ver}’  political  object)  to  the  Chinese 
merchants  at  Malaca,  was  unwilling  to  act,  and  Tufto 
Nacem  Mudaliar,  partly  out  of  chagrin  for  the  failure 
of  his  mission,  and  partly  dispirited  at  the  untimely 
death  of  his  wife,  did  not  live  to  convey  the  news  of 
his  repulse  by  the  Chinese  court  to  his  royal  nephew, 
but  died  on  the  return  journey  at  Yang-chow-fu  or 
Yang-cheu-fu,  near  Nanking.^ 

A manuscript  Eeport,  in  which  is  embodied  a suc- 
^ cinct  historical  relation  of  the  principal  European  em- 
bassies to  China,  now  preserved  among  the  Well^lcy 
papers  in  the  MS.  department  of  the  British  Mtiseum, 
very  justly  attributes  to  Afonso  Dalboquerquo  the 
design  of  establishing  friendly  relations  with  the 
Chinese  empire.  This  design  was  probably  suggested 
to  him  in  the  first  place  by  tbe  intercourse  he  had  with 
the  Chinese  merchant  junks  in  the  port  of  Malaca  at 
the  time  of  the  siege.  The  following  passage  describes 
briefly  the  first  dealings  of  Portugal  and  ^hina  : — . 

^'Alphonso  Albuquerque  (from  whoso  wise  adiniiiistra- 
tioD,  while  Viceroy  in  the  EaSt  Indies,  Portugal  derived 
such  advantages)  formed  the  design  of  opening  a communi- 
cation with  China,  though  he  did  not  live  to  see  it  at- 
tempted. In  consequence  of  intelligence  sent  by  him  to 
the  Court  of  Portugal,  a squadron  sailed  frdtn  Lisbon,  in 
1518,  to  convoy  an  Ambassador  to  China.  The  Abb^ 
BaynaPs  account  of  this  Embassy  is  as  follows : — 

' ' — TH"-"  .-O-"- ' ' 

^ Yang-eheu-fu,  in  Kiang-gu,  32  de^  26.32  min.  117  deg. 
4.13  min.  was,  in  1277,  under  the  Mongols,  a or  chief  town 
of  a district.  Marco  PdNl  is  said  to  have  been  governor  of  this 
.town  for  three  years.  He  ci^s  it  under  the  name  of  Yanju.  But 
see  Col.  Yule’s  Marco  Poloy  ii,  J[38,  etc. 


fOTRODtrCTION. 


xxvii 


As  soon  as  tho  squadron  arrived  at  the  islands  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Canton,  it  was  surrounded  by  Chinese 
vessels,  who  came  to  reconnoitre  it.  Ferdinand  Andpadt\, 
who  oommanded  it,  did  not  put  himself  in  any  posture  of 
defence,  he  suffered  the  Chinese  to  come  on  board,  commu- 
nicated the  object  of  his  voyage  to  the  Mandarins  that 
presided  at  Canton,  and  seivt  his  ambassador  on  shore,  who 
was  conducted  to  Pekin. 

" Whatever  may  have  been  the  state  of  China  when  the 
Portuguese  landed  there,  as  they  had  no  other  object  in 
view  than  to  draw  riches  from  thence  and  to  propagate 
their  religion,  had  they  found  the  best  kind  of  government 
established  in  this  country,  they  would  nob  have  profited  by 
it.  |Thomas  Perez,  their  Ambassador,  found  the  Court  of 
Pekin  iisposed  to  favour  his  nation,  the  fame  of  which  had 
spread  itself  throughout  Asia.  It  had  already  attracted  the 
esteem  of  the  Chinese,  which  the  conduct  of  Ferdinand 
Andrada,  who  commanded  the  Poviugnese  squadron,  tended 
still  further  to  increase.  He  visited  all  the  coasts  of  China, 
and  traded  with  the  natives.  When  he  was  on  the  point  of 
departure,  he  issued  a proclamation  in  the  ports  he  had 
put  into,  that  if  any  one  had  been  injured  by  a Portuguese, 
and  would  make  it  known,  he  should  recover  satisfaction. 
The  ports  of*  China  were  now  upon  the  point  of  being 
opened  to  them.  Thomas  Perez  was  just  about  concluding 
a Treaty,  when  Simon  AndVada,  brother  to  Ferdinand,  ap- 
peared on  the  coast  with  a fresh  squadron.  This  commander 
treated  the  Chinese  in  the  same  manner  as  the  Portuguese 
had  for  some  time  treated  all  the  people  of  Asia.  He  built 
a fort,  withdtit  pei  mission,  on  the  island  of-  Taman,  from 
whence  he  took  opportunities  of  pillaging  and  extorting 
money  from  all  the  ships  bound  from  or  to  the  ports  of 
China.  He  ^carried  off  young  girls  irom  tho  coast,  he 
seized  uj[)(>n  tho  Chinese,  and  made  slaves  of  them ; he  gave 
himself  up  to  tho  most  licentious  acts  of  piracy,  aud  the 
most  shameful  dissoluteness,’  The  iltfloTs  and  soldiers  under 
his  command  followed  his  example.  The  Chinese,  enraged 


xxviii 


INTRODUCTION. 


at  these  outrages,  fitted  out  a large  fleet ; the  Portuguese 
defended  themselves  courageously,  and  escaped  by  making 
their  way  through  the  enemy’s  fleet.  The  Emperor  im- 
prisoned Thomas  Perez,  who  died  in  confinement,  and  the 
Portuguese  nation  was  banished  from  China  for  some  years. 
After  this  the  Chinese  relaxed,  and  gave  permission  to  the 
Portuguese  to  trade  at  the  port  of  Sancian,  to  which  place 
they  brought  gold  from  Africa,  spices  from  the  Molucca 
Islands,  aud  from  Ceylon  elephants’  teeth,  and  some  pre- 
cious stones.  In  return  they  took  silks  of  every  kind, 
china,  gums,  medicinal  herbs,  and  tea,  which  has  since 
become  so  necessary  a commodity  to  the  northern  nations 
of  Europe.  ^ 

''  The  Portuguese  contented  themselves  with  the  huts  and 
factories  they  had  at  Sancian,  and  the  liberty  gra^teS  to 
their  trade  by  the  Chinese  Government,  till  an  opportunity 
ofiered  of  establishing  themselves  upon  a footing  more 
solid  and  less  dependant  upon  the  Mandarins,  who  had  the 
command  of  the  coast. 

A pirate  named  Tchang-si-lao,  whoso  successes  had 
made  him  powerful,  had  seized  upon  the  Island  of  Macao, 
from  whence  he  blocked  up  the  ports  of  China,  and  even 
proceeded  so  far  as  to  lay  siege  to  Canton.  The  neigh- 
bouring Mandarins  had  recourse  to  the  Portuguese,  who 
had  ships  in  the  harbour  of  Sancian ; they  hastened  to  the 
relief  of  Canton,  raised  the  siege,  and  obtained  a complete 
victory  over  the  pirate,  whom  they  pursued  as  far  as  MaOao, 
where  he  slew  himself.  . 

''The  Emperor  of  China,  informed  of  the  service  the 
Portuguese  had  reudered  him  on  this  occasion,  bestowed 
Macao  upon  them,  as  a mark  of  his  gratitude.  They  re- 
ceived this  grant  with  joy,  and  built  a town  which  became 
very  flourishing,  and  was  adjrantageously  situated  for  the 
trade  they  soon  after  entered  into  with  Japan.  ^ 

"The  author  of  L^Idee  Qenerals  de  la  Ohme,  pi»blished 
at  Paris  in  1780,  addsfto  his ’account  of  this  transaction 
(which  agrees  with  the  a{)ove)  that  the  behaviour  of  the 


Hn'RODUCTlON.  xxix 

Portogaese  arobaasador  confirmed  the  Chinese  in  their  aver- 
sion to  foreigners,^  against  whom  they  had  always  shut 
their  empire.  And  speaking  of  the  Emperor's  edict  per- 
mitting the  Portugneae  to  settle  at  Macao,  he  says,  * but 
the  restrictions  with  which  the  Chinese  accompanied  this 
favour,  and  the  manner  of  forming  the  settlement,  as  well 
as  the  shackles  imposed  on, the  liberty  of  the  Portuguose, 
give  to  Macao  rather  the  appearance  of  a place  besieged 
than  of  a free  commercial  city\^'* 

The  Viceroy  of  Canton  has  just  lately  expressed 
himself  in  cordial  terms  towards  the  Portuguese 
nation,  and  e!kpressed  the  necessity  of  drawing  still 
closer  the  relations  between  China  and  Portugal, 
which  ^as  the  first  of  the  European  nations  to  possess 
commercial  establishments  in  China. 

The  construction  of  a powerful,  in  fact  to  the  Malays 
an  impregnable  fortress  in  the  heart  of  their  capital 
was  a natural  consequence  of  the  Portuguese  victory. 
The  bird’s-eye  view  of  this  fortress,  which  has  been  re- 
produced for  this  volume  from  Correa’s  invaluable 
Lendas  da  India,  and  the  plan  of  the  same,  also  repro- 
duced for  this  volume  from  the  equally  precious  manu- 
script of  Pedro  Barrette  de  Resendo’s  Livro  do  Estado 
da  India  Ormital  (by  kind  permission  of  the  trustees 
of  the  British  Museum),  show  sufficiently  the  imposing 
nature  of  thi»-  stronghold.  Next  in  importance  to  the 


‘ Thia  author  adds  in  a note — “ Animian  Marcellin  qui  6crivoit 
daiis  le  quatri^me  siticle  de  notre'^Jire,  parle  de  cet  ^oignoment 
dee  Cbinoia^^iur  les  strangers.”  * 

® Add. '‘Ms.,  13,875,  fo.  24:  “Report  of  Embassies  to  China, 
pi'csented  to  the  British  Museum  by  tl!l  Representatives  of  the 
^ Marquess  Wellesley.'' 


XXX  INTRODTJCTION. 

fortress  were  reconstructive  measures  of  the  victors,  as 
for  example  the  rearrangement  of  the  currency  upon  a 
more  scientific  basis,  and  the  repression  ofsedition  with 
that  iron  hand,  for  which  some  historians  and  biogra- 
phers have  been  so  unnecessarily  severe  upon  Afonso 
Dalboquerque.  Before  we«  condemn  this  prominent 
trait  in  the  character  of  the  Portuguese  commander 
we  must  take  into  consideration  the  somewhat  un- 
gentle spirit ‘of  the  age  in  which  he  lived,  the  brutali- 
ties practised  by  Asiatics  upon  such  unfortunate 
Europeans  as  fell  into  their  hands,  an^  the  absolute 
necessity  that  a comparatively  small  band  of  meil^ere 
under  to  repress  unsparingly  any  and  every  measure 
likely  to  injure  their  tenure  of  a territory  so  far  from 
the  natural  basis  of  their  operations.  Viewed  in  this 
light,  the  execution  of  Utemutaraja,  and  the  carry- 
ing out  of  the  sentence  passed  upon  Buy  Diaz,  were 
measures  calculated  to  procure  the  security  of  the 
whole  body,  rather  than  instances  of  supreme  gratifica- 
tion of  personal  antipathy  towards  the  sufferers. 

The  incidents  of  the  dispatch  of  Duarte  Fernandez 
to  the  court  of  Siam. with  specific  instructions — an 
event  which  helped  greatly  to  elevate  the  position  of 
Portuguese  politics  in  the  east  of  Asia — the  subseqtient 
mission  of  Antonio  de  Miranda  de  Alevedo  to  the 
same  country,  the  interchange  of  presents  and  friendly 
compliments,  similar  courtesies  exchanged  with  the 
kings  of  Campar  and  Java,  and  the  sending^forth  of  a 
party  to  explore  the  Moluccas,  then  knowll  as  the 
Clove  Islands  or  Mace-apple  (t.e.,  nutmeg)  Islands, 
combine  t^.  elevate  in  i considerable  degree  the  career 


INTEODUCTlOJi.  XXxi 

of  Afonso  Dalboquerque  from  that  of  a vulgar  free- 
booter or  licensed  adventurer  (sis  some  will  have  him 
to  bo)  to  that  of  an  earnest  and  scientific  pioneer, 
anxious  that  his  nation,  his  own  followers,  and  himself 
also  should — 

apuTTCvviv  teal  cfo^oi/  ep./i€ifai  aXXait#.*’ 

After  detailing  the  arrangement  made  by  AfSnso 
Dalboquerque  for  the  government  of  the  newly-con- 
quered territory,  the  author  of  the  Cornmentariejs  in- 
troduces an  interesting  Orj^ion,  delivered  by  the 
illustrious  Roman  orator,  Camillo  Portio,  before  Pope 
Leo  This  oration,  although  it  introduces  notices 
of  some  events  beyond  the  scope  of  the  Commentaries, 
is  of  value,  as  showing  the  way  in  which  the  Papal 
court,  and  probably  all  Christendom,  viewed  with 
admiration  and  emulation  the  marvellously  rapid  suc- 
cesses which  had  fallen  to  the  arms  of  Portugal  in  her 
dealing  with  the  infidel  nations  of  the  East. 

The  remaining  portion  of  the  present  volume  reverts 
to  India  and  Goa,  and  the  events  which  had  transpired 
during  the  absence  of  Afonso  Dalboquerque  in  the 
Malay  expedition.  Milrrhau  or  Merlao,  the  duly  ap- 
pointed Governor  of  Goa,  was  conducting  the  affairs 
of  the  city  peaceably,  when  Pulatecao,  in  command  of 
a force  mustered  by  the  Hidalcao,  came  down  from 
the  inland  territory  of  that  prince,  and  took  up  a strong 

position  in  Benastarirn,  or  ^nestarij,’  a fortress  on 
« 

^ The  vajjiatiuu  iu  the  orthography  this  fortress  is  interesting, 
and  show#  the  peculiar  proclivity  of  the  Portuguese  language  for 
a nasal  sound  at  the  termination  "of  wordft/  Many  of  the  names  of 
. persons  and  places  which  occur  in  tl^e  ie\i  of  the  CQ'm^ieiifarie$^ 


xxxu 


INTRODUCTION. 


the  mainland  due  west  of  the  Island  of  Goa ; but  in  so 
disposing  his  forces  he  appears  to  have  exceeded  the 
instructions  which  he  had  received  from  the  Hidalcao. 
This  prince  therefore  appointed  Ro^alcao,  called  by 
some  historians  Rasul  Khan,  to  supersede  Pulatecao 
(or  Fulad  Khan),  and  by  ^means  of  the  Portuguese 
under  Diogo  Mendez  de  Vasconcelos  (who  had  been 
liberated  by  the  people  to  succeed  Rodrigo  Rabelo  as 
Captain  of  Goa,  when  that  officer  fell  in  a skirmish  with 
the  Turks,  in  preference  to  Francisco  Pantoja,  to  whom 
the  succession  rightly  l)elonged),  Ro^alcao^lgot  possession 
of  the  fortress  of  Bencstarim,  and  immediately  di^^von- 
certed  the  little  garrison  of  Goa,  by  making  cPformal 
demand  for. the  surrender  of  the  city. 

While  these  events  were  transpiring,  Afonso  Dalbo- 
querque  had  set  sail  from  Malaca  in  the  Flor  de  la 
Mar,  but  suffered  shipwreck  off  the  dangerous  coast  of 
Sumatra,  and  only  reached  Cochiin  with  great  difficulty 
some  time  in  the  month  of  January  1512.  This 
disaster  was  felt  all  the  more  keenly  by  the  Viceroy 
because  he  afterwards  learned  that  had  he  visited  the 
Maidive  Islands,^  according  to  his  original  intentions 
during  this  voyage,  he  would  have  fallen  in  with 
Mafamede  Ma(,"ari,  the  merchant  of  Cairo — an  enemy 
with  whom  he  was  particularly  anxious  to  mefisure 

terminate  in  -ij,  and  it  is  j)robablc  that  they  were  all  prmiounced 

with  a nasal  sound  at  the  end  of  the  word^  Hence  we  find  Pan- 

c 

gim  or  Pangij,  and  Augiin  or  Augij  ; just  as  in  tl^e  ordinary  lan- 
guage, assi,  peril,  mui,  and  Other  words  have  a nasal,  written, 
but  always  pronounced  at  the  end, 

' Pedro  Barretto  de  flesonde  gives  a plan  of  the  Portuguese 
fortress  on  one  of  these  islands. 


INTRODUCTION. 


XXX  Hi 


his  strength.  This  man  was  the  chief  upholder  of  the 
policy  of  bringing  over  the  Rumes  to  assist  the  ^amo- 
rim  in  driving  the  Portuguese  out  of  Malabar.  Ho 
however  feared  that  Afonso  Dalboquerquc  would  get 
him  into  his  power,  so  he  fled  from  Calicut  (when  the 
break  in  the  blockade  happened  by  the  recall  of  Manuel 
de  Lacerda  to  the  assistance  of  Goa  against  Pulatecao) 
towards  the  Straits,  but  was  caught  in  a storm  and 
wrecked  at  the  Cape  of  Guardafum,  and  thence  made  his 
way,  caiTying  with  him  Simao  Rangel  (who  had  been 
captured  on  his  voyage  from  Cochim  to  Goa)  into 
slav<yy  to  Candaluz,  in  the  Maldives,  where  he  imagined 
hiniseli  safe,  and  out  of  the  possibility  of  capture  by  the 
Portuguese  cruisers,  who  had  hitlierto  kept  to  more 
northerly  latitudes. 

The  welcome  arrival  of  the  fleet  with  the  great 
commander  on  board  gave  the  signal  for  heartfelt 
rejoicing  throughout  the  Portuguese  settlements  of 
India,  and  from  January  to  August  1512,  Afonso  Dal- 
boquerque  busied  himself  with  the  expedition  of  ne- 
cessary business  which  had  no  doubt  accumulated  in 
bis  absence  during  the  past  year.  But  fate  had  not 
ceased  to  weave  the  crimson  web  of  war”  for  Afonso 
Dalboquerque ; the  relief  of  Goa  was  the  uppermost 
feeling  in  hi*  heart,  and  he  hailed  with  the  greatest 
satisfaction  and  delight  the  arrival  of  two  annual  fleets 
sent  out  from  the  ^mother  kingdom  in  1511  and  1512 
respectively, •for  the  reinforcemept  of  the  Indian  colo- 
nies, Xh^e  fleets,  the  one  commanded  by  Dom  Garcia, 
& Gracia,  de  Noronha,  his  nephew ; tlie  other  by  Jorge 
de  Hello  Pereira  and  Gracia  de  Sousa,  added  no  less 

VOIi,  til.  / 


XX  XIV 


INTRODUCTION. 


than  seventeen  ships  of  war,  with  their  men  and  stores, 
to  the  sadly  diminished  number  of  serviceable  vessels 
and  fighting  men  at  the  disposal  of  the  Viceroy.  But 
the  joy  he  experienced  at  receiving  these  welcome  re- 
inforcements was  quickly  dispelled  by  the  orders  sent 
out  to  him  from  the  king  pf  Portugal  for  discussing 
the  question  of  retaining  or  abandoning  the  possession 
of  Goa. 

Afonso  Dalboquerque  very  prudently  abstained 
from  mentioning  this  matter  until  he  had  re-established 
the  liberty  of  the  city  by  the  operation^  which  led  to 
the  recovery  of  the  dominating  fortress  of  Benast^rim, 
for  he  doubtless  felt  that  had  he  divulged  thS  king’s 
orders  to  his  captains  and  ofiiccrs  before  they  had 
driven  the  Turks  into  the  interior,  the  movements  in 
aid  of  the  besieged  city  and  island  would  have  been 
carried  out  without  heartiness  and  spirit,  or  perhaps 
even  neglected  and  refused.  But  when  the  fortress  had. 
yielded  to  the  Portuguese,  the  spirits  of  the  populace 
raised  by  the  dispersion  of  the  enemy,  ai^d  the  martial 
feelings  of  the  army  elated  by  the  easy  victory,  then 
it  was  that  the  commander  felt  that  a fitting  oppor- 
tunity at  length  had  arrived  when,  although  he  could 
no  longer  with  propriety  withhold  the  contents  of  the 
Royal  dispatch,  the  general  consensus  of  opinion  would 
lean  towards  that  course  which  he  so  ardently  desired 
to  carry  out. 

The  surrender  of  BenasUrim  was  accomplished  with 
practically  little  trouble,  for  Ropalcfio  seeml*'  ^.o  have 
been,  after  all,  but  half-hearted  in  the  task  of  its  d^ 
fence.  He  appears,  hawever,  to  have  tried  as  far  as 


INTRODUCTION, 


XXXV 


he  could  to  shield  the  Portuguese  renegade  deserters 
from  a fate  which  he  probably  knew  only  too  well 
would  overtake  them  if  they  fell  into  the  power  of 
their  irate  master;  but  the  excuse  which  he  made,  that 
it  was  contrary  to  the  law  of  his  country  and  the  princi- 
ples of  his  religion^  to  giye  them  up,  availed  nothing 
with  Afonso  Dalboquerque,  whose  ferocity  (parti- 
cularly if  all  that  Castanheda  and  Correa  state  bo 
true)  towards  the  ill-fated  wretches  can  hardly  be 
paralleled  with  any  other  relation  out  of  the  whole 
range  of  histofy. 

settlement  of  Fernao  Lopez,  the  ringleader  of 
these  renegades,  upon  the  uninhabited  Island  of  Saint 
Helena,  is  of  great  interest  to  the  political  geographer. 
Correa,  whose  phrases  seem  to  indicate  that  he  com- 
miserated the  unfortunate  man,  says  of  him  : ‘‘Fern5o 
Lopez^  managed  to  get  on  board  a Portuguese  vessel 
homeward  bound,  for  he  had  left  his  wife  and  children 
in  Lisbon,  but  the  ship  stopped  at  the  Island  of  St. 
Helena  to  ta^c  in  water,  and  there  this  FernSo  Lopez 
remained  in  hiding,  and  when  be  was  found  missing 
out  of  the  ship  the  crew  set  out  and  searched  for  him, 
but  they  could  not  find  him,  so  they  left  him  a barrel 
of  biscuit  and  some  pieces  of  hung  beef,  and  dried 
fish,  and  salt#  and  a fire  and  some  old  clothes,  which 

' See  MS.,  Sloan.  1820,  a closely  written  folio  work,  seventeenth 
or  eighteenth  oentuiy,  in  Portuguese,  apparently  unpublished, 
entitled  Seiia  dos  ludios  Orientois,  e prinoipalmente  doe  Mala- 
varee’’,  in  ilght  books,  treating  of  the  history  and  mythology  of  the 
mligiouB  Beets,  manners,  and  customs,  of  the  people  inhabiting 
Malabar.  • » • 

* See  the  extract  on  pp.  240-242  for  the  Portuguese  text. 


xxxvi 


INTRODUOTIOK. 


each  one  contributed;  and  when  the  vessel  set  sail, 
they  left  a letter  for  him,  that  in  case  of  any  ship 
putting  in  there  he  was  to  make  signs  to  show  whether 
he  were  alive  or  dead,  and  shew  himself  in  order  that 
they  might  supply  him  with  whatever  he  required. 
Then  the  vessel  set  sail,  and  Fernfio  Lopez,  seeing  the 
ship  had  left,  went  out  of  the  wood  and  took  posses- 
sion of  the  things  which  he  found  left  for  him,  and 
kept  up  the  fire  so  that  it  should  not  go  out,  and  set 
to  work  to  find  stones  which  he  beat  one  against 
another,  and  he  saw  that  they  struck  fire  and  he  kept 
them.  Thus,  with  the  four  fingers  of  his  left  hand, 
and  with  the  stump  of  his  right  hand  which  haVi  been 
cut  off,  as  God  helped  him  in  his  great  mercy,  he  dug  a 
hollow  in  a bank  w'herein  he  made  a small  grotto,  and 
enlarged  it  within,  where  he  lived  in  retreat  and 
used  to  sleep,  and  he  filled  up  the  mouth  of  the  grotto 
with  prickly  bushes.  He  found  tender  herbs  which 
were  savoury  to  eat,  and  he  boiled  them  with  salt  in 
two  saucepans  which  they  had  left  for^  him.  And 
while  he  was  living  in  this  way  during  the  next  year  a 
ship  touched  at  the  island,  and  when  he  saw  the  ship 
he  hid  himself. 

**  The  crew  of  the  ship,  going  on  shore,  when  they 
saw  the  grotto  and  a straw  bed  whereon  he  slept,  and 
the  bags,  and  the  staves  of  the  barrel  which  had  been 
left  with  biscuit  for  him,  and  the  saucepans,  and  coals 
for  the  fire,  were  ama2ed,%r  they  thought  that  some 
negroes  were  living  there^in  hiding  from  another  ship, 
but  when  they  beheld  the  clothing  they  agreed  that  it 
was  a Portuguese  So  they  took  in  their  water, 


INTEODUCTION. 


XXXVll 


and  did  not  meddle  with  anything,  but,  on  tho  con- 
trary, left  him  biscuits,  and  cheeses,  and  things  to  eat, 
and  a letter  bidding  him  not  to  hide  himself,  but  when 
any  ship  should  touch  there  he  should  speak  with  it, 
for  no  one  would  harm  him.  And  the  ship  set  sail, 
and,  in  spreading  her  sails^, there  fell  overboard  a cock, 
which  the  waves  carried  to  the  shore,  and  Fernao 
Lopez  caught  it  and  fed  it  upon  some  rice  which  they 
had  left  behind  for  him,  so  that  the  cock  became  on 
such  loving  terms  with  him  that  it  followed  him 
wherever  he  Went,  and  at  night  it  roosted  with  him  in 
the  ^Jple.  This  cock  remained  with  this  man  for  many 
years,  ft  would  come  at  his  call,  for,  as  time  went  on, 
this  man  used  to  show  himself  and  converse  with  the 
people  of  the  ships  which  passed  by,  and  all  gave  him 
things  to  plant  and  to  sow,  so  that  he  cultivated  a 
great  many  gourds,  pomegranates,  and  palm  trees,  and 
kept  ducks,  hens,  sows,  and  she-goats  with  young,  all 
of  which  increased  largely,  and  all  became  wild  in  the 
wood.  , 

“ This  man  lived  for  many  years  alone  in  this  island, 
leading  this  remarkable  life,  and  when  it  was  related 
to  the  king  he  was  very  desirous  of  seeing  him,  for 
they  said  that  he  was  like  a wild  man ; therefore,  the 
king  sent  word  to  beg  him  of  his  own  accord  to  come 
to  Portugal.  This  he  did,  and  he  went  and  secretly 
disembarked  in  the  house  of  the  captain  of  the  ship, 
and  thence  went  by  night  fc  converse  with  the  king 

fd  th^ljueen,  who  gave  him  a hermitage  and  houaea 
friars  wherein  he  might  remain ; but  he  would 
.-accept  nought  of  this,  but  obtained  permission  of  the 


xixvHi 


INTRODUCTION. 


king  and  went  to  Borne,  and  confessed  bimself  to  the 
Pope,  who  was  pleased  to  see  him,  and  gave  him 
letters  to  the  king  that  he  would  send  him  back  again 
to  the  island.  This  likewise  the  king  performed.  This 
man  stayed  on  this  island  for  upwards  of  ten  years 
without  any  one  ever  seeing  him,  for  he  used  to  hide 
himself. 

“ In  this  island  there  lived  a fugitive  Javanese  youth, 
who  also  stayed  with  him  many  years.  This  youth 
was  the  one  who  revealed  him  to  a ship  which  touched 
there.  For  the  captain,  Pero  Gomez  Teixeira,  who 
had  been  Auditor-General  in  India,  threatened^  the 
black  man  so  much  that  he  went  and  pointed  but  the 
place  where  Fernfio  Lopez  was  hidden.  And  when  he 
found  that  he  was  taken  he  made  loud  outcries,  think- 
ing that  they  were  going  to  take  him  on  board.  But 
Pero  Gomez  consoled  him,  and  talked  for  a long  time 
with  him,  and  assured  him  that  he  would  not  carry 
him  away,  and  gave  him  many  things,  although  he 
did  not  care  for  them,  but  very  earnestly  besought 
him  to  take  the  youth  with  him  in  the  ship.  Pero 
Gomez,  therefore,  took  him  on  receiving  a promise 
from  Fernao  Lopez  that  he  would  not  hide  himself 
from  the  crews.  And  when  this  had  been  agreed  to, 
Pero  Gomez  left  with  him  a paper,  signed  and  sealed, 
wherein  he  desired  all  captains  who  might  touch  there 
of  their  kindness  not  to  use  any  fo|^C6  in  desiring  to 
carry  him  to  Portugal  gainst  his  'frilli  for  it  was 
from  fear  of  this  that  Fernfio  Lopez  used  in‘^i)y-gon^ 
times  to  hide  himsehl  Therefore,  he  gave  him  a safdl 
guard  in  the  king’s  name,  and  swore  to  it,  that  no  one 


INTEODtTOTION. 


XXXIX 


should  cany  him  away  from  the  island  against  his 
will  And  then  Fern&o  Lopez  felt  assured,  so  that  he 
used  no  longer  to  hide  himself,  and  spoke  with  all 
comers,  and  gave  them  of  the  produce  of  the  island, 
which  yielded  in  great  abundance.  And  in  the  island 
he  died,  after  living  there  Jar  a long  time,  which  was 
in  the  year  1546.” 

The  blockade  of  Calicut,  which  was  commenced 
anew  by  D.  Garcia  de  Noronha;  the  mission  of  Diogo 
Fernandez,  Adail  of  Goa,  with  the  returning  ambas- 
Mdo|^of  the  HidalcSo,  to  arrange  the  terms  of  peace  ; 
the  dispatch  of  the  Cambayan  ambassador,  in  whose 
company  Tristfio  D6ga  went  to  demand  leave  to  erect  a 
fortress  in  Diu;  the  dispatch  of  a messenger  from 
Miliquiaz  of  Did ; the  mission  of  Gaspar  Chanoca  to 
Narsinga;  the  reception  of  an  ambassador  with  pre- 
sents from  the  king  of  Vengapor,  an  inland  territory 
bordering  on  the  kingdom  of  the  Zabaim ; an  interview 
of  a fruitless  pature  with  Ro9alc&o ; and  other  similar 
business,  naturally  occupied  Afonso  Dalboquerque  for 
some  time  after  his  return  to  Goa.  But  an  event  oc- 
curred about  this  period  to  which  he  devoted  consider- 
able interest,  and  attached  great  importance.  This 
was  the  arrival  of  an  envoy,  named  Mateus  or  Mat- 
thew, the  brother  of  the  Patriarch  of  Abyssinia,  from 
the  little  known  jmd  mysterious  kingdom  of  Frester 
John,  with  » present  of  a piece  of  the  Wood  of  the 

tie  CuAs  from  the  Warden  of  the  Franciscan  Friars 
Mount  Sion,  Jerusalem;  to  the  king  of  Portugal, 
, and  an  offer  of  alliance  by  marriage  of  the  children 


INTRODtrOTIOK. 


sl 

of  the  Prester  John  with  the  Royal  Princes  of  tihe 
kingdom. 

Afonso  Dalboquerque  forwarded  this  ambassador 
and  his  sacred  present  with  great  ^clat  to  the  king  of 
Portugal,  but  in  the  eyes  of  many  of  the  Portuguese 
Mateus  was  looked  upon  as  an  impostor  whom  the 
Viceroy  favoured  for  his  own  glorification.  The  king 
treated  him  with  honour,  and  sent  him  back  in  1520 
with  D.  Rodrigo  de  Lima,  a Portuguese  ambassador, 
but  Mateus  died  on  the  way  at  Bisam,^  on  the  23rd  of 
May,  1520,  and  D,  Rodrigo  prosecuted  his  journey,  a 
relation  of  which,®  by  Father  Francisco  Alvarez,  ^ns- 
lated  from  the  Portuguese  and  edited  by  the  accom- 
plished Portuguese  scholar  Lord  Stanley  of  Alderley, 
is  now  being  published  by  the  Hakluyt  Society.  Stu- 
dents of  Portuguese  history,  who  are  already  under  a 
debt  of  gratitude  to  the  noble  translator  of  Vasco  da 

' According  to  the  work  mentioned  in  the  next  note  ; but  from 
the  Commentaries^  p,  254,  he  appeani  to  have  died  at  Ma^ua,  Of 
Ma^sowah,  an  important  city  on  the  African  side^of  the  Red  Sea } 
cf. 

e as  melhores 

Povoa<j5e8  quo  a parte  Africa  tern, 

Ma9ua  sSo,  Arquico,  e Suanquem.” — Cam.  Lus.y  x,  97. 
MateuB,  the  ambassador,  appears  to  have  been  of  an  irritable  dis* 
position,  and  this  was  perhaps  the  cause  of  the  ^slike  shewn  to 
him  by  the  Portuguese  with  whom  he  came  into  contact., 

* The  title  of  this  rare  book,  a 6ne  specimen  of  early  Portuguese 
typography,  is ; Ho  Freste  Joam  das  Indiigua.  Verdadera  infor- 
ma^am  das  terras  do  Preste  ^oara,  segundd*viq  e ^oreveo  h(> 
padre  Francisco  Aluarec  CapellS  del  Rey  nosso  seni^.  Agoia 
nouamSte  impresso  por  maudado  do  dito  seuhor  em  cai^ 
Rodriguez  liureiro  de  sdfe  alteia.’*  The  colophon  states 
book  was  printed  in  1540, 


INTRODtrCTIOIf. 


Xli 

Gama  from  Correa's  Lerdas  da  India,  will  look  for- 
ward to  the  appearance  of  this  narrative  of  the  Por- 
tuguese embassy  to  Abyssinia  in  1520  with  the  greatest 
interest.' 

After  making  disposition  for  the  projected  fortress 
in  Calicut,  if  the  ^Jamorir^  should  really  grant  the  site 
— a fact  which  Afonso  Dalboquerque  seems  to  have 
despaired  of  at  last — an  assembly  of  the  principal 
Portuguese  personages  was  held,  and  the  King's  articles 
read.  The  debate  which  ensued  resulted  in  the  deter- 
mination to  hold  Goa  at  all  hazard ; and  the  letter 
which  Afonso  Dalboquerque  addressed  to  the  King,  a 
chara^^ristic  specimen  of  the  fearlessness  of  the  great 
commander, ‘ concludes  this  volume. 

The  portrait  of  Dorn  Vasco  da  G ama,  which  is  placed 
as  a frontispiece  to  this  volume,  and  that  of  Diogo 
Lopez  de  Sequeira,  which  is  set  to  face  page  254,  are 
derived  from  the  MS.  of  Pedro  Barretto  de  Kesende,  in 
the  Sloane  Library  of  MSS.  at  the  British  Museum. 
They  have  bqen  reproduced  by  the  autotype  process, 
with  permission  of  the  Trustees  of  the  British  Museum, 
to  whom  the  thanks  of  the  Hakluyt  Society  are  due 
for  this  favour. 

The  interesting  plan  of  Malaca  fortress  and  settle- 
ment comes  ifrom  the  Siime  MS.  The  map  of  the 

' The  phrase,  ndo  me  tome  cada  anno  coiiia  do  que  faqo  com> 
a Mmomr^e'\  in  4f<m80  Dalboqui^jue’s  letter,  seems  clearly  to 
to  a certaTn  necessity  on  the  part  of  those  who  have  hod  ^ to 
goveni  for  occasional  use  of  large  sums  of  money  for  secret 
objects.  The  history  of.Warron^astings  and  JLord<^ 
iiipafer  centurib^  afford  examples  of  the  disasters  ai^ndant  upon 
« this  necessity. 

VQI.,  lu. 


xlii 


INTKODUCnON. 


Malay  peninsula  has  been  reproduced  in  a reduced  form 
with  great  care  from  a chart  contained  in  a most  valu- 
able Portolano  executed  by  the  Portuguese  hydrogra- 
pher,  Diego  Homem,  in  1558.  This  MS.  is  prberved 
among  the  additional  MSS.  in  the  British  Museum. 
{Add,  MSS.,  5415  a.)  For  the  permission  to  trace 
these,  I desire  to  record  my  thanks  to  Mr.  B.  M. 
Thompson,  F.S.A.,  keeper  of  the  manuscripts  in  the 
British  Museum.  The  bird’s-eye  view  of  Malaca  has 
been  reduced  by  photo-lithography  from  the  frequently 
cited  Lendas  da  India,  a work  of  very  great  value 
for  collation  with  other  historical  narratives  o|‘,jthe 
Early  History  of  Portuguese  India. 


CHRONOLOGY  OF  PART  III. 


FAO*  i.J>. 

1.  Afonso  DaUioquerqne  Jiasaults  Ooa  . 25  Nov.  1510 

1.  [Sails  for  the  Stmits Fob.  1511] 

207.  [Dora  Gaftia  de  Noronha  sails  with  six  sliips 

from  Portugal  25  March  and  8 April  15  H] 

101.  Afonso  Dalboquerquo  assaults  Malaca  on  St. 

James’s  Day [25  July  1511] 

207.  [Builds  tho  fortress  of  Malaca  . . August  1511] 

164.  Autonio  Dabreu  sails  to  exploi^e  the  Moluccas 

During  November  [1511] 

195.  [Afonso  Dalboquerque,  8hipwrecke<i  on  tho  voy- 
age from  Malaca  to  India,  reaches  Cochirn 
• During  Januarj' 1512] 

195,  [Dora  Garcia  de  Noronha  reaches  Moqambique 

Beginning  of  February  1512] 

208.  [Jorge  de  Mello  Pereira  sails  with  twelve  ships 

from  Pbrtugal  . . . 25  March  1512] 

208.  [JoJo  Chanoca  sails  for  Portugal  13  July  1512] 

207.  Arrival  of  the  Fleets  of  D.  flarcia  D.  Noronha, 

Jorge  de  Mello  at  Cochirn  20  Aug.  1512 

2i0.  Afonso  Dalboquerque  sails  from  CoSfiim  for  Goa 

10  Sept.  1512 


Xliv  CHRONOLOGY  OF  PART  lit. 

208.  [The  Fortrese  of  Calicut  built  by  the  Portugueae 

During  the  Year  1512] 

265.  Dorn  Garcia  de  Noronha  blockades  Calicut 

During  Jan.  [1513] 

256.  But  rejoins  Afonso  Dalboquerque  at  Goa  10  Feb.  [1513] 
172.  Oration  of  Camillo  Portio  before  Leo  X During  Oot.  1613 


COMMENTARIES 

Of  tni 

GREAT  AFONSO  DALBOQUEEQUE. 


COMMENTARIES 


OF  THE  GREAT 

AFONSO 

DALBOOUERQUE, 


WHO  WAS 

^APTAIN-GENERAL  OF  THE  EAST  INDIES 

IN  THE  TIME  OF  THE  VERY  POWERFUL 


KING  D.  MANUEL, 

THE  FIRST  OF  THIS  NAME. 


PA  A 7'  III. 


LISBON : 

THE  ROYAL  PRINTING  OFFICE, 

ANNO  MDCCLXXlV';' 

With  Lkeme  of  the  Poyal  Board  of  Onsoviy  and  Royal  Rrhniegi, 


TITLES 


OF  THR 

CHAPTERS  CONTAINED  IN  THIS  THIRD  PART. 


WHEB^^N  18  CONTAINED  AN  ACCOUNT  OF  WHAT  THE  GREAT  AFONSO 
DALBOQUERQDE  PEliFORMED  IN  THE  CONQUEST  OF  THE  KING- 
DOM OP  GOA  FOR  THE  SECOND  TIME,  AND  OF  THE  KING- 
DOM OF  MALAGA : AND  ALL  THE  REST  THAT  HE  DID 
UNTIL  HIS  DEPARTURE  TO  THE  STRAITS. 


CHAPTER  I. 

How,  after  his  fleet  was  ready,  he  sot  out  for  the  harbour  of 
Cananor:  and  what  passed  with  the  King  of  Gar(jopa  and 
. Timoja  concerning  tlie  entry  of  tlie  river  of  Goa  . 1 

CHAPTER  n. 

Of  the  council  which  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerqiie  held  with 
the  captains  concerning  the  attacking  of  the  city,  and  the 
remainder  of  the  eventa  connected  therewith  . 6 

CHAPTER  III. 

0 

How  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerquo  attacked  the  city  of  Goa,  and 
took  it  by  force  of  arms,  when  some  of  our  side  were  killed ; 
and  of  the  great  havoc  that  was  made  of  the  Moors  9 

^ CHAPTEi^  IV, 

How  the  g^ySat  Afonso  Dalboquerque  gave  the  soldiers  permission 
to  sa^k  the  city : and,  of  the  crucifix  which  was  found  in 
some  old  vralls  from  which  stohe  was  tiiken  for  the  fortress : 
and  of  the  miracle  which  Our  Lord  performed  for  our  side 
on  the  day  of  the  battle  .15 

TOL<  m.  h 


1 


TITLES  OF  THE  CHAPTERS 


CRAPTfCB  Y. 

How  the  Xeqnibarefl  sent  to  request  a safe  conduct  from  Afonso 
Dalbo<iuerque,  in  order  that  they  might  come  and  live  at  Goa; 
and  how  our  forces  put  to  rout  Meliqueaye,  the  captain  of 
the  HidalcSo  *.  . .21 


CHAPTEU  VI. 

How  Merlao  came  to  Goa,  and  the  Neqiiibares  desired  Afonso 
Halbociuerque  to  give  hirn  to  tkem  for  their  governor,  and 
what  took  place  thereupon ; and  how  he  ordered  Diogo  Fer- 
nandez de  B6ja  to  destroy  the  fortress  of  ^acotoiA  . . 25 

CHAPTER  VII. 

Of  the  ambassadors  whom  the  f^’ainorim,  after  the  fall  of  Goa, 
sent  to  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque,  desirin;^  peace  with 
him ; and  how  SimSo  Rangel  was  sent  upon  this  business, 
and  what  passed  concerning  it  . .30 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

How  the  King  of  Narsinga  sent  his  ambassadors  to  visit  Afonso 
Dalboquerque  concerning  the  capture  of  Goa ; and  of  the 
news  which  Fr.  Luiz  communicated  to  him,  and  what  i)a88ed 
thereafter  . . .36 


CHAPTER  IX. 

How  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  set  in  order  certain  mat  ten 
in  the  city,  and  established  a Mint  there,  and  of  what 
followed  .89 


CHAPTER  X.  5 

Of  the  proceedings  of  the  Bondar^,  Governor  of  Malaca,  when  he 
heard  that  Goa  had  been  taken,  and  of  the  news  which  Ruy 
de  Araujo,  who  was  in  captivity  there,  wrote  to  the  great 
Afonso  Dalboquerque  . . .44 

CHAPTER  XI. 

How  the  Captains  of  the  Fleet  of  Diogo  Mendez  i^efnested  him 
to  sot  out  for  Malaca ; and  of  what  passed  with  them,  and 
how  he  begged  Afonso  Dalboquerqne  to  grant  him  permission 

to  go ; and  of  the  reasons  wherefore  it  was  gifted  , 48 

e-  ' 

CHAPTER  XIX. 

„ 

How  Diogo  Mendez,  by  the  advice  his  captains,  hoisted  saft  to 
pass  over  the  bar,  and  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  sent 
after  him,  and  they  made  him  tom  back,  and  the  rest  which 
took  place  * ...  51 


CONTAINED  IN  THIS  THIRD  PART. 


li 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

How  th«  great  Afonao  Dalboqiierque  set  sail  for  the  Strait*  of 
M4ca  with  his  fleet,  and  finding  he  could  not  croBs  the  shoals 
of  Padua,  stood  off  Goa  and  mado  his  way  direct  to  Malaca  . 55 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

How  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  set  sail  from  Cochim,  and 
made  his  way  direct  to  Malaca,  and  of  what  passed  thereupon  57 

CHAPTER  XV. 

How  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  set  sail  from  the  port  of  Pac6, 
and  at  sea  ho  sighted  a sailing  vessel  which  was  carrying 
the  Moor  who  was  flying  from  him,  and  how  he  sent  after 
the  vessel,  and  what  further  took  place  .60 

« CHAPTER  XVI. 

How  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  reached  the  p6rt  of  Malaca, 
ai>^the  king  sent  immediately  to  visit  him,  and  the  rest 
that  book  place  . . .66 

CHAPTER  XVII. 

Of  the  site  and  foundation  of  the  kingdom  and  city  of  Malaca  . 71 

CHAPTER  XVIII. 

Of  the  customs  and  government  of  the  city  of  Malaca  . . 84 

CHAPTER  XIX. 

Of  the  message  which  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  sent  to  the 
king  of  Malaca,  and  of  the  council  which  he  held  with  his 
captains  oonfeming  the  letter  which  Iluy  de  Araujo  scut  him  90 

CHAI*TKR  XX. 

Of  the  requisition  which  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquenjue  ordered 
to  bo  made  to  the  king,  signed  by  himwdf  and  all  the  cap. 
tains;  and  how  the  king  sent  him  Ruy  do  Araujo  and  his 
companions  whom  he  had  there  . .93 

* CHAPTER  XXI. 

How  the  Chinese  merchants,  who  wore  at  Malaca,  made  their 
way  to  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  ; and  of  what  passed 
with  him  ; and  of  the  council  i^ich  he  held  with  the  Cap- 
taioe,  Fidal^s,  and  Cavaliers  of  the  Fleet  to  attack  the  city  . 97 

CHAPTER  XXII. 

How  the  great  Afonso  UalboqueVque,  on®  the  morning  of  St. 
Jameses  day,  attacked  the  city  of  Malaca,  and  what  passed 
thereupon  . * 


Ui 


TITLES  OP  THE  CHAPTERS 


CHAPTKU  XXin. 

How  Tufio  Bandfio,  captain  of  the  king  of  Malaca,  j)erceiving  the 
diapergion  of  the  Moon,  went  to  their  assistance  with  a body 
of  aoldiers,  and  what  passed  thereupon ; and  how  the  king 
took  to  flight,  and  our  men  pursue^i  him  . . 105 

CIIAPTBR  XXIV. 

How  the  king  of  Malaca,  after  the  Portuguese  had  withdrawn  to 
their  ships,  began  to  reconstruct  the  stockades  and  fortified  his 
position  on  the  bridge ; and  of  the  message  winch  Utenuitu- 
raja  sent  to  the  great  Afonso  Dolboquerquo  .108 

CHAPTER  XXV. 

How  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerquo  prepared  hiuiself  for  renew- 
ing the  attack  upon  the  stockades  which  the  king  liad  set  upon 
the  bridge  : and  how  the  Chinese  desired  of  hini  perinission 
to  return  to  their  land : and  of  the  ambassador  whom  he  sent 
with  them  to  the  king  of  Sino  . \ 111 

CHAPTER  XXVI. 

The  speech  which  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  made  to  the 
Captains  and  men  of  the  Fleet  for  the  second  attack  upon  the 
city,  and  what  passed  thereupon  .114 

CHAPTER  XXVII. 

How  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquenpie  again  attacked  the  city  ^ 
according  to  the  resolution  which  had  been  arrival  at,  and 
how  he  entered  the  bridge  by  force  of  arms  and  fortified  him- 
self on  it  . . 120 

CHAPTER  XXVITI. 

How  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  ordered  relief  to  be  given 
to  our  men  who  were  stationed  at  the  mouth  of  the  street 
which  led  to  the  bridge : and  how  Utemutaraja  and  Nina-  j 
chatu,  and  other  raerchanta,  seeing  the  overthrow  of  the  city,  / 
came  and  plaaxl  themselves  in  his  hands  . . .V  124 

. CHAPTER  XXIX.  ^ 

Of  how,  after  the  Prince  of  Malaca  had* withdrawn  from  his 
father,  ho  came  to  the  river  of  Muar  and  fortified  himself 
therein  with  a number  of  s^kadee,  and  Itne  great  Afonso 
Dalboquerque  sent  a force  against  him,  and  put  Mm  to  flight  12$ 

CHAPTER  XXX.  * 

How  the  King  of  Malaca,  ti4ter  the  Portuguese  bad  gained  the  city 
from  him,  withdrew  to  the  ktugdom  of  Pio,  and  dispatched  an 
Ambassitdoif  to  the  King  6t  China,  begging  for  succour  . 131 


CONTAINED  IN  THIS  THIRD  PART. 


ilU 


CHAPTER  XXXI. 

How  the  King  of  Malaca,  having  arrived  at  the  kingdom  of  PSo, 
died;  and  how  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  began  to  build 
• the  fortress ; and  the  inscription  which  he  placed  over  the  gate 
after  it  was  ftuished,  and  what  passed  hereupon  . . 134 

chapter  xxxii. 

How  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque,  at  the  request  of  the  Gover- 
ncffs  and  people  of  the  city,  ordered  money  to  be  coined;  ^ 
and  of  the  value  thereof,  aud  of  tlie  rest  that  was  done  there- 
upon . . .137 


CHAPTER  XXXIII. 

How  the  merchants  and  all  the  noble  Moors  of  the  city  com- 
plained to  great  Afonso  Dalboquerquo  of  the  tyrannies 
which  lltemutaraja  exercised  in  the  land,  and  l!ow  he  had  in 
hi4  |}Ower  all  the  supplies,  and  of  many  other  things  which 
he  did  . . .143 


CHAPTER  XXXIV. 

How  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque,  on  account  of  the  corrobo- 
ration which  he  received  concerning  the  treason  which  Ute- 
mutaraja  was  planning  against  him,  determinod  to  seize  him, 
and  his  son,  and  his  son-in-law ; and  the  rest  that  took  place, 
and  what  passed  with  the  wife  of  UtemuUraja  . . 147 

CHAPTER  XXXV. 

How  Duarte  Ferifandez,  and  the  Chinese,  whom  he  carried  in  his 
company,  reached  the  city  of  Udii,  where  the  King  of  Sifio 
liv^,  and  gave  him  the  message  which  he  carried  from  the 
great  Afonso  Dalboquerque;  and  of  the  ambassador  whom 
the  King  of  SiSo  sent  to  him  . .162 

CHAPTER  XXXVI. 

•>> 

How  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  dispatched  the  ambassaiAor  of 
the  King  of  Si&o,  and  in  company  with  him  sent  Antonio  da 
Miranda  de  Azevc^o  with  instructions  how  to  act,  and  of  the 
present  which  was  sent  through  kkn  , .166 

CHAPTER  XXXVII. 

How  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  dispatched  the  ambaisadon 
of  the  Kings  of  Oampor  and  Java,  and  ordered  the  explora- 
tion of  the  Island  of  klaluco  . 169 


TITLES  OF  THE  CHAPTEES 


Hf 


chapter  xxxvm. 

Of  the  Cotmcil  which  the  great  Afonao  Lalboquerque  held  with 
the  Captains  rospectiug  the  order  in  which  ho  should  leave  the 
management  of  affairs  at  Malaca,  and  some  ordinances  which  < 
he  made  for  the  government  of  the  country  before  his  de- 
parture for  India  .....  165 

CHAPTER  XXXrX. 

Oration  which  Camillo  Portio  made  to  the  Pope  Leo  the  Tenth  in 
praise  of  tho  capture  of  Malaca,  and  of  the  victories  gaiufKl 
by  the  Portuguese  in  their  compiost  of  India  . .169 

CHAPTER  XL. 

The  proceedings  of  the  Portuguese  in  Goa  with  tho  Captains  of 
the  Hidalcao,  w’ho  came  and  besieged  the  city  ^ftor  the  de- 
parture of  the  great  Afonso  Dalhoquen^uo  for  Malaca  . 187 

CHAPTER  XU. 

How  the  Hidalcao,  on  learning  that  his  Captain  hod  made  an 

entry  into  the  Island  of  Goa  and  taken  Benastarim  without  ^ 
permission,  ordered  llo^alcao  to  take  it  from  him,  and  wlmt 
passed  thereupon  . .190 

CHAPTER  xui. 

How  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque,  having  set  sail  from  MalacA, 
steered  for  the  channel  by  which  he  had  entered  when  ho 
came  from  'India : and  how  he  was  wrecked  on  some  shal- 
lows off  the  Coast  of  (,^amatra,  and  miraculously  saved,  and 
the  rest  that  took  place  .193 

CHAPTER  XLIH. 

Of  what  was  lost  in  the  ship  JF^or  de  la  Mar:  and  how  the  Great 
Afonso  Dalboquerque,  after  having  collected  his  people  to- 
getlier  on  tho  ship  Trindade^  proceeded  on  his  route  toCeilio: 
and  of  what  took  place  on  the  voyage  until  they  arrived  at 
Cochim  . . , ^ .198 

CHAPTER  XLIV. 

How  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  reached  Cochim ; and  of  tho 
news  which  they  gave  him  concerning  Goa,  a«&d  of  the  coining 
of  the  Rumes,  and  of  the  fleet  which  arrived  from  f ortngal  . 204 

C.  J, 

CHAPTER  XLV.  Ji 

How  the  great  Afonso  Do^oqperqae  set  out  from  Cochim  with 
tho  intention  of  going  in  sear^  of  the  Rumee ; and  how  he 
proceeded  to  besiege  the  fortress  of  Benastarim  210 


CONTAINED  IN  THIS  THIRD  PART. 


Iv 


CHAPTKB  XLVl. 

How  the  great  Afonso  Dalboqnerque  ordered  the'  stookade^  where- 
with the  Turks  had  surrounded  the  fortress  in  order  that  our 
» ships  should  not  go  inside,  to  be  pulled  up ; and  how  he  went 
to  the  city  after  haring  put  them  inside,  and  what  further 
took  place  . . ’ . .214 


CHAPTER  XLVU. 

Uow  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  arrived  at  the  city  [of  Goa], 
and  of  the  great  reception  with  which  the  inhabitants  met 
him,  and  of  the  rest  which  passed  with  the  Turks  . . 220 

CHAPTER  XLVIII. 

How  Roijalcfio  was  put  to  flight,  and  the  great  Afonso  Dalbo- 
querque  follovs^  in  pursuit  after  him  up  to  the  very  walls  of 
the  fortress  of  Benesterij,  and  of  what  further  took  place  225 

^ CHAPTER  XUX. 

^low  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  rallied  his  people,  and  went 
back  to  the  city;  and  how  he  returned  again  ^ith  all  his 
battle  array  to  besiege  the  fortress,  and  of  what  passed  with 
Roijalcto  . . . .229 


CHAPTER  L. 

Of  how  the  great  Afonso  i>c.itoQuerquo  debated  with  the  Cap- 
tains and  Fidalgoes  who  were  the  terms  offered  by 
Ilo^aloao  ; and  of  the  agreement  which  and  how 

he  set  out  for  Goa  . . • * • 

• CHAPTER  LI. 

How  our  men  entered  the  fortress,  and  wanted  to  pillage  the 
Turks,  if  the  great  Afonso  Dalboqnerque  had  not  prevontod 
them;’  and  what  passed  with  the  renegades,  and  how  he  set 
forth  towards  Goa  . • • • • 

^ CHAPTER  LII. 

How  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  sent  D.  Garcia  de  Noronha, 
his  nephew,  with  a fleet  against  Calicut;  and  how  he  dis- 
patched the  ambawadors  who.  were  waiting  for  him  at  Goa, 

and  the  rest  vjhich  took  place  . . 


t*  ' CHAPTER  LIU. 

How  an  ambassadorlrom  King  Vengapor  anlyod  at  Goa,  and  how 
the  great  Dalboquerque  bore  himself  with  Ko^alcao,  and  what 
pass^  with  them  . * . 


TITLES  OF  THE  CHAPTERS 


liv 

qHAPTER  XXXVIII. 

Of  the  Council  which  the  g;rcat  Afonso  Dalboquerque  held  with 
the  Captains  roapectiug  the  order  in  which  he  should  leave  the 
management  of  afifaira  at  Malaca,  and  some  ordinances  which 
he  made  for  the  government  of  the  country  before  his  de- 
parture for  India  . .100 

CHAPTER  XXXIX. 

Oration  which  Camillo  PorUo  made  lo  the  Pope  Leo  the  Tenth  in 
praise  of  the  capttire  of  Malaca,  and  of  the  victories  gained 
by  the  Portuguese  in  their  con<iuest  of  India  . 1C9 

CHAPTER  Xr.. 

The  proceedings  of  the  Portuguese  in  Cloa  with  the  Captains  of 
the  Hidalcsio,  who  came  and  besieged  tlic  city  ^fter  the  de- 
parture of  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  for  Malaca  . 187 

CHAPTER  XLI. 

How  the  Hidalcao,  on  learning  that  his  Captain  had  made  an 
entry  into  the  Island  of  Goa  and  taken  Bcnastariin  without 
permission,  ordered  Ro^alcao  to  take  it  from  him,  and  what 
passed  thereupon  .190 

CHAPTER  XLII. 

How  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquenjue,  having  set  sail  from  Malaca, 
steered  for  the  channel  by  which  he  had  entered  when  ho 
came  from  Lidia : and  how  he  w'rs  wrecked  on  some  shal- 
lows off  the  Coast  of  ^^matra,  and  miraculously  saved,  and 
the  rest  that  took  place  . 193 

CHAPTER  XUII. 

Of  what  was  lost  in  the  ship  Flor  de  la  Mar:  and  bow  tlie  Great 
Afonso  Dalboquerque,  after  liaving  collected  his  people  to- 
gether on  the  ship  Trindade^  proceeded  on  his  route  to  Ceilao: 
and  of  what  took  place  on  the  voyage  until  they  arrived  at 
Cochim  ...  .198 

CHAPTER  XLIV. 

How  the  great  Afonso  Dalbo<iuerque  reached  Cochim ; and  of  the 
news  which  they  gave  him  concerning  Goa,  aod  of  the  coming 
of  the  BumeSyAud  of  the  fleet  which  arrived  from  Portugal  . 204 

c-  * 

CHAPTKB  XLV. 

How  the  great  Afonso  Di#K)querqie  set  out  from'  Cochim  with 
the  intention  of  going  in  search  of  the  Rumes ; and  how  he 
proceeded  to  beriege  the  Rirtress  of  Benastarim  210 


CONTAINED  IN  THIS  THIRD  PART. 


Iv 


CHAPTER  XLVI. 

How  the  greAt  Afonao  Dalboquerque  ordered  the  stockade,  where- 
with the  Turks  had  surrounded  the  fortress  in  order  that  our 
» ships  should  not  go  inside,  to  be  pulled  up ; and  how  he  went 
to  the  city  after  having  put  them  inside,  and  what  further 
took  place  . . . .214 


CHAPTER  XLVII. 

How  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  arrived  at  the  city  [of  Goa], 
and  of  the  great  reception  with  which  the  inhabitants  met 
him,  and  of  the  rest  which  passed  with  the  Turks  . 220 

CHAPTER  XLVIII. 

How  Ro<;alcSo  was  put  to  flight,  and  the  great  Afonso  Dalbo- 
querque follo^^  in  pursuit  after  him  up  to  the  very  walls  of 
the  fortress  of  Benesterij,  and  of  what  further  took  place  . 226 

CHAPTER  XLIX. 

,How  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  rallied  his  people,  and  went 
back  to  the  city;  and  how  he  returned  again  with  all  his 
Imttle  array  to  besiege  the  fortress,  and  of  what  passed  with 
Ko^alc&o  . . .229 


CHAPTER  L. 

Of  how  the  great  Afonso  l>»-iv»^uerque  debated  with  the  Cap- 
tmns  and  Fidalgocs  who  were  tb«iN,  terms  offered  by 
Ro^alofto ; and  of  the  agreement  which  . and  how 

he  set  out  for  Goa  • .^04 

• CHAPTBK  LI. 

How  our  men  entered  the  fortress,  and  wanted  to  pillage  the 
Turks,  if  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  had  not  prevented 
them ; and  what  passed  with  the  renegades,  and  how  ho  set 
forth  towards  Goa  . • • • • 

^ CHAPTER  LII. 

How  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  sent  D.  Garcia  dc  Noronha, 
his  nephew,  with  a fleet  against  Calicut  ; and  how  he  dis- 
patched the  ambassadors  who.  were  waiting  for  him  at  Goa, 
and  the  rest  ^hich  took  place  . . - .243 


• CHAPTER  LIII. 

How  an  ambassador  from  King  Vengapor  arriy*»d  at  Goa,  and  how 
tiie  great  Dalboquerque  bore  liimself  with  Ko9alcao,and  what 
passed  with  them  ■ * ■ 


TITLES  OF  CHAFTEBS. 


M 


CHAFTiR  mr. 

Of  the  Arrival  of  the  embavy  of  the  Freatee  Jofto  at  Goa,  and  of 
the  manner  in  which  he  was  received ; and  how  the  great 
Afonao  Dalboquerque  aent  him  to  Portugal,  and  the  rest  which 
took  place  . . 

CHAPTKR  LV. 

Of  the  arrival  of  D.  Garcia  de  Noronha  at  Cochim;  and  how,  after 
settling  the  order  in  which  the  veflaeU  were  to  be  arranged, 
and  dispatching  the  ships  which  were  to  sail  to  Portugal 
during  that  year  with  their  ladings,  he  set  sail  for  Calicut 
with  all  his  fleet,  and  what  took  place  there  . . 2^5 

CUAPTBU  LVI. 

How  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  gave  an  accouiit.  to  the  cap- 
tains and  officers  of  the  king  ooucemiug  the  letter  which  the 
King  had  written  to  him  respecting  the  surrender  of  Goa  |o 
the  HidalcSo,  and  what  was  agreed  to  in  this  behalf  * . 257 


PART  III. 


V'HEREIN  IS  CONTAINER  AN  ACCOUNT  OP  WH.\T  THE  OREAT  AP0N80 
DALliOQURRQUE  PEHPOKMEl)  IN  THE  CONQUEST  OF  THE  KING- 
DOM OP  GOA  FOR  THE  SECOND  TIME,  AND  OP  THE  KING- 
DOM OP  MALAGA:  AND  ALL  THE  REST  THAT  HE  DID 
UNTIL  ms  DEPARTURE  TO  THE  STRAITS. 


(CHAPTER  1. 

How,  after  his  fleet  was  ready,  he  set  out  for  the  harbour  of  Cananor  : 
and  what  passed  with  the  King  of  Gar^^opa  aud  d'imoja  concerning 
the  entry  of  the  river  of  Goa. 

When  tlie  interviews  were  concluded,  which  ilio  great 
Afonso  Dalboquerque  held  in  Cochitn  with  (ron^ilo  de 
Sequeira  and  the  other  captains,  lie  set  out  towards  Cana- 
nor,  where  he'  found  ready  the  fleet  and  all  the  things 
which  he  required  for  his  voyage.  And  without  making  any 
delay,  ho  set  sail  with  a fleet  of  twenty-three  vessels,  con- 
taining about  two  thousand  Portuguese  : and  of  them  there 
wore  the  Captains  Manuel  de  Lacerda;  Fermlo  Perez  Dan- 
drade;  Siraao*Dandrado,  his  brother;  RastifXo  do  Miranda; 
Afonso  Pessoa;  Ruy  de  Brito  Putalim;  Diogo  Fernandez 
de  B^ja ; Jorge  Nunez  do  LiAo ; Francisco  Pereira  Postana ; 
D.  Jofi-o  de  Lima;  D.  Jeronyrno  de  Lima,  his  brother; 
Manuel  da  Cunha ; Duarte  do  Melo  ; Pore  1 )ufonseca : 
Caspar  de  Paiva;  Simfl-o  Martinez;  Fruncisco  Pantoja;  An- 
tonio de  Matos ; and  Diogo  Mendez  do  Vasconcelos,  who 
• was  going  to  Malaca;  Dinis  Cerniche,  Baltliezar  da  Silva,  and 
VOL.  III.  B 


2 


COMMENTARIES  OF 


Pero  Coresma,  who  were  to  accompany  [Diogo  Mendez  de 
Vasconcelos],  And  so  the  whole  fleet  wont  along  the  coast  and 
stood  over  against  Onor  to  take  in  fresh  supplies  and  wator.^ 
As  soon  as  the  King  of  Garc^opa  and  Timoja  were  in- 
formed  of  the  arrival  of  Afonso  Dalboquerque  at  the  port, 
they  wont  to  talk  with  him,  and  after  the  customary  greet- 
ings were  over,  ho  asked  thom»wliat  news  they  had  of  Goa 


* It  is  useful  to  compare  with  this  list  that  of  Gaspar  Correa,  who 
gives  the  following  names  of  captains  accompanying  Afonso  Dalboquer- 


que against  Goa  ; — 

*Joain  do  Lima. 

Jeronymo  de  Lima,  his  brother. 
Manuel  de  Ijacerda. 

Fernarn  Peres  d’ Andrade. 

8im3k)  d’Andrado,  his  brother. 
Diogo  Fernandes  de  Jl6ja. 
♦Manuel  da  (’unha. 

Duarte  de  Mello. 

Francisco  de  I'avora.  . 

Vasco  Fernandes  Coutinho. 
♦Garcia  <ie  Sousa. 

Gaspar  CSo. 

Lopo  Vaz  do  Samjiayo. 

Ayres  da  Silva. 

Dinis  Fernandes  de  Mello. 

Joam  Serrano. 


Diogo  Mendea  do  VasconceL 
lofi. 

Pero  Coresma. 

Baltesar  da  Silva. 

Micer  Vinote  Cernicho  [called 
Dinis  Cernicho  in  the  Cominen” 
tnriix]. 

Antonio  Kaposo. 

♦Simao  Martins. 

Gaspar  de  Paiva. 

Francisco  Pantoja. 

♦Bastiam  do  Miranda  d’Azevedo. 

Afonso  Pessoa. 

Jorge  Martina  do  Liao  [called 
Jorge  Nunez,  do  Liao  in  the 
Commentaries^ 


in  twenty-eight  ships,  and  1,700  Portuguese.  'Hie  names  marked  with 
asterisks  are  among  those  who  gave  an  opinion  at  the  council  of  war 
just  before.  Correa  also  mentions  the  following  as  being  with  Afonso 
Dalboquerque  in  the  attack  on  Goa: — 


•Fernarn  Gomes  do  Lemos,  Sinifto  Martins  yenriquez. 

Nuno  Vaz  de  (’astello  Branco.  Payo  Rodriguez  de  Sousa. 
♦Jorge  da  Silveira.  Diogo  Pirez  de  Miranda. 

Ruy  de  Brito.  Duarte  de  Mello. 

Luis  CotttiDho,  brother  of  Vasco  Alvaro  Pe^knba. 

Fernandez.  Luis  Preto.  ■* 

Similo  d’Andrade,  brother  of  Fer-  Pero  Dafonsequa. 

nam  Perez.  , , Antonio  de  Matos. 

Gonzalo  d' Almeida.  Antonio  Diniz,  and  others. 

Lord  Stanley’s  Virst  Voyage  qf  Magellan^  pp.  xxiii,  xxiy. 


AFONSO  DALBOQUERQUB. 


3 


and  of  the  Hidalcfto  ? They  told  him  that  there  were  in 
Goa  three  captains,  who  had  about  four  thousand  men  in 
the  garrison,  all  Turks,  Ruraes,  and  Cora(;oues,^  with  cer- 
tain peons  of  Balagate,  who  were  archers ; and  there  were 
about  an  equal  number  of  native  Moors.  And  they  declared 
that,  if  he  had  come  with  the  intention  of  attacking  tiio  city, 
it  was  just  at  the  very  nick  of  time,  for  tlie  llidalcfto  was 
prosecuting  a war  with  the  Guazils  of  the  Kingdom  of 
Decan,  who  had  wrested  from  him  a great  part  of  his  lauds, 
and  he  was  now  so  far  advanced  into  the  interior  of  the 
country,  that  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  return  and  relieve 
Goa.  l^hey  stjiid,  too,  that  they  were  ready  with  all  their 
people,  as  they  had  already  notified  to  him,  to  servo  him  by 
land  in  that  expedition. 

Afonso  Dalboquerque  received  the  promise's  they  made, 
and  thanked  them  heartily  for  them.  But,  although  it  seemed 
to  him  to  be  a doubtful  thing  to  attack  Goa,  held  as  it  was 
by  so  many  forces  and  now  become  s6  much  on  the  alert, 
as  these  persons  had  declared  to  him,  nevertheless  ho  made 
up  his  mind  to  blockade  it  with  all  his  forces,  and  to  attack 
the  enemy  ; and  with  this  determination  he  set  sail  with  the 
whole  of  his  fleet,  and  bore  up  for  Anjadiva,  where  ho  re- 
mained for  eleven  days  without  forming  any  resolutions  of 
future  proceedings.  For  when  ho  arrived  there,  he  was 
advised  not  to  place  any  reliance  upon  the  promised  offers 
of  the  King  of  Oan^opa  and  of  Timoja,  because  they  were  in 
%ir  lest  things  should  not  turn  out  well  for  tliem,  and  they 
did  not  wish  IJD  bo  in  worse  relations  to  tlio  llidalcfto  thah 
they  were  already.  And  thus  the  great  Ahiiiso  Dalboquor-  . 
que,  perplexed  by  all  those  doubts  which  were  convoyed  to 
him,  set  out  from  Anjadiva,  and  proceeded  to  Ciist  anchor  over 
againsyihe  bar  of  Goa,  and  ordered  Manuel  da  Cunha,  with 
six  shi^s,  to  enter  through  Old  Goa,  and  make  his  way  to 
Agacij,  and  to  the  laud  of  Saste,  to  co-operate  with  the  army 
» Inhabitaata  of  the  Rhorassan. 

B 2 


4 


eOMMKNTAUlES  OF 


of  Tiinoja,  wlio  would  have  to  approach  by  that  direction. 
And  Manuel  da  Cunha,  as  soon  as  he  reached  the  pass  of 
Benastarim  and  of  Agacij,  fired  a gun  and  remained  quietly 
in  the  river  waiting  for  the  array  to  arrive. 

No  sooner  had  Manuel  da  Cunha  set  forth,  than  Afonso 
Dalboquorque  summoned  the  captains  to  his  ship,  and  told 
them  they  were  well  aware  of  the  promises  made  to  them 
by  tho  King  of  Gaivopa  and  Tiinoja,  but  that  ho  himself, 
from  what  he  had  heard  in  Anjadiva,  and  also  bec^ause  thoy 
had  delayed  in  their  journey,  very  much  doubted  if  these 
people  meant  to  keep  their  word.  Ho  therefore  begged 
them  to  decide  whether  lie  should  iindertal^e  this  matter 
without  counting  very  much  on  tho  support  of  the  native 
army  which  had  boon  offered,  or  whether  they  should  first 
go  to  Cambaya  and  there  settle  the  terms  of  peace.  Tho 
captains  listened  to  tho  arguments  of  Afonso  Dalboquerque, 
and  were  all  unanimously  of  opinion  that  he  ought  to  attack 
Goa;  for  if  that  city  were  once  taken,  the  King  of  Cambaya 
would  consent,  they  said,  to  carry  out  all  tho  conditions 
they  might  require  of  him ; and  what  was  more,  ho  would 
not  delay  releasing  the  cjiptives  whom  ho  had  in  his  power. 
This  advico  appeared  good  to  Afonso  Dalboquerque,  who 
sent  immediately  a message  to  Manuel  da  Cubha  to  return 
and  rejoin  the  fleet.  And,  as  soon  as  he  arrived,  all  weighed 
anchor,  and  stood  in  up  the  river  and  reached  a pass  about 
as  far  from  the  city  us  a falconet  would  carry  a shot,  where 
tho  Turks  had  sunk  threo  Malabar  ships  laden  with  stones, 
in  order  to  impede  any  further  passage  of  «ur  vessels  up 
the  river.  But  this  artifice,  which  tho  Turks  thought  to 
avail  themselves  of,  turned  out  exactly  tho  opposite  of  what 
they  intended;  for,  instead  of  blocking  the  river,  the  force 
of  the  water  that  ran  down  was  so  great,  that  it  opened  two 
channels  much  deeper  than  the  one  which  they  had  blocked 
up. 

When  Afonso  Dalboquerque  arrived  at  this  spot,  ho 


AFONSO  DALBOQUKIU^UE. 


ordered  tho  small  vessels  to  go  up  through  these  new  elia])- 
nels  which  tho  river  had  made,  and  told  the  oaptiiins  to 
strain  every  nerve  to  reach  the  fortress  as  quickly  as  they 
could  ; and^  as  it  was  now  late,  there  was  not  time  for  great 
vessels  to  make  the  passage.  But,  ns  soon  as  ruorning 
broke,  Afonso  Dalboquorquo  got  into  a boat,  and  proceeded 
to  tho  station  whore  the  small  vesscds  were  at  anchor,  with 
all  tho  rest  of  the  fleet  which  followed  him,  and  there  he 
^ttled  hiras('lf,  and  sent  Duarte  do  Lomi^s,  Gaspaf’  do  Puiva, 
and  Diogo  Fernando/,  de  Boja,  to  man  their  skiffs  and  re- 
connoitre the  condition  of  the  fortress.  Tlioso  three  got  up 
in  front  of  it,  and  examined  it  very  closely,  and  reported  to 
Afonso  Dalbo(pierque  that  it  was  very  strong,  fortitied  with 
many  trenches  and  bulwarks,  and  emhrasuros  flush  with  the 
water, ^ with  much  artillery  therein,  and  a very  largo  ditch 
So  Afonso  Dalboquerque,  on  receipt  of  this  intelligonct 
which  the  captains  reported,  ami  on  consiilmation  of  tin. 
number  of  the  forces  within  tho  city,  came  to  the  conclusior] 
that  it  was  a very  perilous  undertaking  to  attack  it;  yet 
neverthelcs.s,  confiding  in  God  to  help  him,  he  sent  on  ir 
advance  Bostlao  de  Miranda,  Afonso  Pessoa,  and  Buy  dt 
Brito  Paialiin,  to  make  their  way  with  tlveir  galleys  to  tin 
other  side  of  the  fortress  ; and  as  they  were  pL*rcoivud  the} 
were  plied  with  the  artillery  contained  in  it,  but  our  lior*. 
protected  them,  so  that  they  sustaiuerl  no  injury.  And 
although  all  these  things  rendered  the  business  of  attacking 
the  city  more  hazardous,  yet,  in  order  to  be  more  completolj 
informed  on  lill  points,  ho  ordere<I  l)u»go  feriiando/.  de  Bcj< 
to  seize  by  night  upon  some  native  inter[)reter ; and  h\ 
moans  of  a i\toor  who  was  thus  takem,  he  learned  that  tlu 
Ty^rks  had  a great  quantity  of  tirtilUu-y  both  large  and  small 
and  ma^iy  foot  soldiers  and  cavalrv.  and  many  .stores  ■,  am 
that  Moors,  the  natives  of  tlu3  laud,  had  promised  tho  Hid 
alcfto  that  they  would  ail  die  in  delending  the  city  from  th 
’ ilo  luiiif  ihi  u*jit(Jy  iu<l  ciuxl  wj.tcr  . 


6 


COMMENTARIES  OF 


entry  of  the  Portuguese ; and  that  the  Turks,  in  addition 
* to  this  promise  which  they  had  made,  out  of  fear  that  if 
any  troubles  came  upon  them  the  Moors  would  rise  up 
against  them,  had  given  orders  that  all  the  women  and 
children  of  the  principal  persons  of  the  laud  should  be 
placed  in  the  fortress. 


CHAPTER  11. 

Of  the  council  whicli  the  great  Afonso  Dnlboqnerque  held  with  the 
capUina  concerning  the  attacking  of  the  city,  and  the  remainder 
of  the  eventa  connected  therewith. 

For  three  days  after  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  had 
acquired  this  information  concerning  the  ready  state  of  the 
city  he  remained  without  coming  to  any  determination 
whether  ho  should  wait  or  not  for  the  King  of  Gar^opa 
and  Timoja,  from  whom  the  only  help  he  expected  was 
that  they  would  come  and  stir  up  the  Hindoos  against 
tho  Moors,  and  prevent  their  furnishing  the  latter  with 
supplies  or  paying  the  duties  for  the  land  which  they  were 
♦ bound  to  pay.  And  at  this  juncture,  while  he  was  thus 
delaying  himself,  without  making  up  his  mind  what  to  do, 
the  Turks  made  some  very  strong  stockades  of  timber, 
filled  in  with  earth,  with  their  ditches  full  of  water,  along 
the  banks,  and  in  these  they  stationed  many  pieces  of  large 
artillery,  and  appointed  a captain  with  his  men  to  defend 
them.  > 

But  when  Afonso  Dalboquerque  perceived  that  the  Turk^, 
out  of  the  excessive  confidence  they  had  in  their  fortress, 
were  constructing  stoykades<>outsido  to  wArd  off  the  attack 
upon  their  ships,  and  prevent  their  being  burned,  and  were 
quite  certain  of  the  safety  of  everything  else,  he  summoned 
the  captains  and  all  thfe  Fidalgos  and  cavaliers  of  the  fleet, 
and  laid  before  them  tho.  opinion  he  had  of  these  doings  of 


AFONSO  DALBOQUBRQUB. 


7 


the  Turks,  and  desired  it  to  bo  debated  whether  they  should 
first  of  all  attack  tho  stockades,  or  sot  themselves  forthwith 
in  battle  array  and  storm  the  fortress.  And  when  this  had 
been  discussed,  at  length  every  one  agreed  that  the  fortress 
should  be  attacked  before  the  stockades ; because,  although 
it  might  be  the  strongcjr,  it  was  there  that  they  all  desired 
to  accomplish  tho  wishes  they  had  of  taking  vengeance  of 
what  had  already  befallen  thorn.  For  after  they  had  once 
taken  tho  fortress,  there  was  nothing  more  for  them  to  do. 

But  Afonso  Dalboijuorque  and  Diogo  Mendez  de  Vascon- 
cclos  were  not  with  them  in  this  way  of  thinking,  but 
rather  considered  that  they  should  first  destroy  the  stock- 
ades, and  when  these  wore  overcome,  they  would  get  in  [to 
the  fortress]  with  the  enemy  pell-inoll;  and  that  this  ought 
to  be  put  into  practice  immediately,  because  all  the  rest  of 
the  time  they  spent  there  without  doing  anything  was  but 
weakening  more  and  more  their  chances  of  succt^oding  in 
this  matter  j and  in  this  opinion  of  Afonso  Dalboquorque 
everyone  concurred,  but  they  agreed  to  wait  three  days 
longer  for  the  King  of  Gar(j;opa.  For  Afonso  Dalboquer- 
que  told  them  that  as  they  wore  clearly  minded  to  attack 
the  cit)',  they  had  no  timo  now  to  look  for  any  other  help 
beyond  that  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  which  would  not  fail 
them,  seeing  that  they  fought  for  his  Holy  Faith,  which  he 
for  his  part  truly  behevod  in;  and  tliat  the  deteutiou  of  the 
King  of  Carcopa  and  Timoja  had  all  been  brought  about  by 
the  Turks  by  the  great  force  of  bribes  which  they  had  given 
Ihem  not  to  qome;  and  that  Timoja  was  so  artful  that  he  was 
sure  to  keep  up  his  dissembling  and  not  arrive  until  after 
the  fall  of  the  city,  for  ho  saw  very  well  that  it  was  like  to 
cost  much  blood  in  the  taking ; and  theroforo  they  ought 
not  to  lose  tfme  in  waiting  for  his  support. 

AnS  with  this  settlement  of  the  matter  he  dismissed  the 
captains  to  their  ships  to  make  ready  for  the  next  day,  in 
the  morning,  when  all  were  to  pro(;eed  to  attack  tho  stock- 


B 


COMMENTARIES  OF 


ados,  and  when  they  were  once  captured,  the  circuinstaiices 
of  the  victory  would  point  out  how  they  should  proceodv  So 
lie  divided  all  liia  foroes  into  thi-eo  coinjiniiifs  in  order  ol 
battle  ; that  is  to  say,  IVtaniiel  da  Cunha,  Alanuol  do 
Lucerda,  D.  Jotlo  dt'  larna,  D.  Jeionymo  do  Lima,  his 
brother,  Gas(>ar  J’aiva,  (iaspar  C;lo,  Vernao  Feyo,  Pero 
Dalbnsf'ca,  and  many  others,  into  one  coinpany,  which  was 
to  go  and  attack  the  stockades  near  the  fortress.  And  in 
the  s('cond  company  ho  set  Diogo  Mendez  d('  Vascoucelos, 
Baltezar  da  Silva,  Dinis  (!enii(lie,  IMro  (Jort'sma,  who 
carried  with  him  his  son  Jorge  (.'oresma  (who  is  now  super- 
intondont  of  tlio  royal  ovens),  who,  tlnnigh  he  was  but  a 
child,  gave  a veny  good  account  of  liimself  that  day , and 
Ruy  do  Lrito  Ikitulim,  and  Jurge  Nunez  do  Liao,  with  many 
other  soldiers,  to  attack  tlie  stockades  on  tlie  <ides  near  the 
ships  ; while  lio  himself,  with  the  rcmaimh.'r  of  the  forces 
and  ca})taiT)s,  woidd  go  ami  take  the  stockades  in  Hank  by 
a road  wliii/h  led  from  Mandovii  l)y  a branch  upwards  which 
ho  know  of,  foi’  if  ho  wont  tli(*re  tjo  would  b(^  placed  be- 
tween the  Moors  and  the  city,  and  if  ho  took  their  stock- 
ud(\s  in  Hank  tlicy  could  nut  fail  to  make  great  havoc 
among  thcfii. 

And  because  there  werc'  in  that  road,  which  Afonso  Lal- 
l)or|uci‘(jue  determined  to  explore,  certain  palisadings  of 
very  strong  timber,  in  order  not  to  bo  delayed  by  anything 
wlicii  li(^  should  get  there,  ho  ordered  Dinis  Fernandez,  the 
master  of  his  sliip,  to  go  in  advance  in  charge  of  thirty 
mni'im  rs  to  cut  them  down,  taml  he  was  not  to^Uow  anyone 
to  set  tire  to  the  ships  which  were  on  tho  beach,  unless  they 
were  entirely  discomHted  in  tho  endeavour  to  take  tho 
city.  Lilt,  whereas  tlic  captains  still  adhered  to  their 
opinion,  they  rctnnual  again  forthwith  by  night  to  talk 
with  Afonso  Dalboqncrqno,  and  laid  before  him  many 
reasons  wliy  lie  should  'ffttack  tho  fortress  before  the  stock- 
ades; ami  he  on  his  part  unfolded  to  them  many  others,  to 


ATONSO  DALBOQUEHQUK. 


0 


show  whore  he  disagreed  from  their  conclusions.  And 
there  arose  so  many  discussions  on  one  side  and  the  other 
about  this,  that  Afonso  Daiboquerque,  in  spite  of  his  own 
opinion,  and  in  order  to  content  them,  desisted  from  wliat 
he  had  arranged  to  do,  and  allowed  hirnsolf  to  be  convinced 
by  their  arguments.  And  when  the  Turks  perceived  ^Iiis 
delay,  for  it  was  now  seven  days  that  our  men  had  been 
there  without  doing  anything,  they  began  to  grow  auda- 
cious, and  built  some  stockades  still  closer  to  our  fleet, 
wherein  they  placed  six  large  bombjj^rds,  and  began  to  fire 
them  against  us.  ^ 

Alonso  Dalbognorqno  waa  annoyed  at  the  little  account 
the  Turks  made  of  him,  and  with  grave  and  ojq)ortiine  con- 
sideration, be  sent  word  to  the  captains  to  make  themselves 
ready,  and  on  the  following  day,  in  the  morning,  to  come  on 
board  his  ship,  for  his  intention  was,  in  spite  of  all  the  dis- 
cussions that  had  been  hold,  to  attack  the  stockades  and 
fight  the  Turks,  for  ho  could  not  brook  their  vain-glory- 
ing ; and  each  one  was  to  fight  in  the  place  which  had  been 
marked  out  for  him. 


cuAPTKu  nr. 

How  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  attackc<i  the  city  of  and  took 
it  by  force  of  arms,  when  some  of  our  were  kilJeel ; aiui  of  the 
great  liavoc  that  v as  made  of  the  jMoors. 

And  now  that  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerqne  had  made 
all  arrangements  to  attack  the  city,  as  I have  said,  on  the 
following  day,  before  morning  broke,  which  was  the  day  of 
St.  Catharine,^  the,  2oth  day  of  the  month  of  November, 

• ‘'^Na  luz,  que  sempre  celebrada,  e dina 
8erA  de  Egyptia  8ancta  Cathariiia.  ’ 

^ Cam.,  4.3. 

See  Vol.  I,  Introil.,  p.  i,  for  the  coJitcxt  and  Fansliaw's  quaint  trans- 
'^lation.  i 


10 


COMMENTARIICS  09 


of  one  thousand  five  hundred  and  ten,  the  captains,  who 
were  already  prepared,  arrived  with  all  their  men,  and 
boarded  the  flag-ship;  and  they  found  Afonso  Dalboquerque 
already  gone  on  board  his  skiff,  and  a pardo  with  a hundred 
and  fifty  soldiers  waiting  for  them.  And  after  a general 
confession  had  been  made  by  all  of  them,  they  arranged 
themselves  in  three  companies  of  attack,  according  to  the 
instructions  'already  promulgated,  and  proceeded  against 
the  city,  for  the  day  had  now  fully  dawned ; and,  on  their 
arrival,  without  any  farther  consultation,  they  went  on  to 
attack  the  stockades,  each  company  taking  up  the  position 
that  had  been  marked  out  for  it. 

The  Turks,  who  were  stationed  therein,  defended  them- 
selves for  a long  time,  and  prevented  any  entry  of  the 
enemy,  and  Afonso  Dalboquerque,  with  the  men  he  had  in 
his  company,  on  arriving  at  the  palisades  which  Dinis  Fer- 
nandez had  already  cut  down,  went  up  along  the  edge  of  the 
ridge  at  the  double.  The  Turks,  because  they  did  not  fear 
any  attack  from  that  side,  as  soon  as  they  felt  themselves 
harassed  by  people  at  their  back,  after  making  a long  resist- 
ance, began  to  retire  from  the  stockades.  The  captains, 
w^hcn  they  perceived  that  the  enemy  were  beginning  to  be- 
come embarrassed  with  the  arrival  of  Afonst)  Dalboquerque, 
fell  upon  them  so  valiantly,  carrying  in  their  van  the  Apostle 
Sanctiago  [Saint  James  the  greater],  who  was  going  with 
them  as  their  guide,  that  in  a short  space  of  time  they  got 
into  the  stockades,  and  with  the  enemy  in  flight  made  their 
way  pell-mell  as  far  as  the  gates  of  the  city,*without  looking 
behind  them,  killing  and  maiming  many  Turks  and  Bumes, 
all  of  them  of  superior  class,  and  many  well  attired  in  silken 
habits  and  brocades.  ^ “ 

Manuel  da  Cunha,  Manue]  de  Lacerda,*  Dom  JoS^  de 
Lima,  D.  Jeronymo  de  Lima,  his  brother,  and  others  in 
their  company,  which  were  m advance,  on  arriving  at  the 
gate,  experienced  gre^t  resistance  from  the  Turks;  but,^ 


AFONSO  DALBOgUBBQUS, 


11 


nevertheless,  animated  by  the  victory  which  our  Lord  pointed 
out  to  them,  they  entered  into  the  city  by  force  of  arms, 
and  behind  them  entered  Dinis  Fernandez,  who  had  come 
up  by  this  time  with  the  men  whom  he  had  taken  to  cut 
down  the  palisades.  And  so  all  these  being  united  together 
kept  on  pursuing  the  Moors  as  far  as  the  gate  of  the  fortress, 
and  then  they  fought  a grea|  battle  with  them ; so  well 
fought  indeed  was  it  on  one  side  and  the  other,  that  for  a 
long  space  of  time  eBch  side  thought  that  it  had  gained  the 
victory.  The  Turks,  however,  who  were  stationed  within 
the  fortress,  aame  up  at  once  on  horse  to  succour  their  men, 
and  so  put  our  men  to  rout  But  just  at  this  moment  there 
arrived  l)iogo  Mendez  and  Jorge  Nunes  do  Liilo,  with  all 
the  Fidalgos  and  men  they  had  in  their  company,  and  found 
a great  number  of  our  men  already  wounded  and  put  to 
great  straits  j but  on  their  arrival,  the  new  comers  shouted 
out  to  them  to  fall  again  upon  the  Turks,  and  they  would 
follow  them  up. 

With  this  fresh  relief  our  men  fell  upon  the  Moors  on 
foot  and  on  horseback,  and  one  and  all  closed  so  desperately 
with  them,  that  they  routed  them,  and  all  together  entered 
pell-mell  through  the  gates  of  the  fortress ; some  of  our 
party  being  left»  behind  already  dead  or  wounded.  Manuel 
de  Lacerda,  who  was  marching  along  wounded  in  his  face 
by  an  arrow,  just  as  he  entered  by  the  gate  encountered  a 
Turk  upon  a horse,  and  killed  him,  and  mounted  the  horsb, 
and  performed  a great  feat  in  continuing  to  go  on,  for  he 
had  a piece  of  i)roken  arrow  fixed  in  his  face,  and  all  hia 
armour  was  smirched  in  the  blood  which  ran  down  from  it. 
At  this  time  Afonso  Dalboquerque  was  making  his  way  with 
his  company  at  the  back  of  oipr  men,  going  at  a quick 
march,  in  order  *to  give  succour  whenever  he  should  perceive 
they  had  need  of  it.  But  the  Turks,  when  they  became 
aware  that  they  had  been  invaded  hf  our  men,  who  were 
following  them  op,  collected  together  to  the  number  of  five 


12 


COMMENTARIES  OF 


hundred,  including  a hundred  mounted  men  with  their  own 
captain,  and  rallied  and  turned  back,  and  fought  with  such 
vigour,  that  our  soldiers  tried  hard  for  a long  time  without 
being  able  to  make  them  yield. 

When  Afonso  Dalb(>(|uer(jiio  was  informed  of  the  peril 
our  men  were  in,  he  l)ore  down  to  this  spot  at  full  speed, 
with  all  thc3  soldiers  in  his  company,  to  reinforce  them,  and 
on  coming  ilp  to  them,  some  among  their  company  inado 
such  fierce  havoc  among  the  Turks  with  their  lancet,  that 
they  routed  them,  and  killed  many;  among  them  being  tw^ 
chief  captains  out  of  three  whom  tlio  Hidalca<)  had  there. 
As  soon  as  Manuel  do  Jiacenda  beheld  Afonso  Dalboquerqiie, 
ho  dismouutorl  his  chargor  and  presented  it  to  him.  And 
when  Afonso  ]^all)oquerquo  saw  Jiim  with  his  armour  all 
smirched  with  blood,  ho  embraced  lilm,  and  said  ;"-‘SSir 
Manuel  de  Lacorda,  I declare  to  you  that  T nm  greatly 
envious  of  you,  and  so  would  Alexander  the  (Ireat  have  been, 
had  ho  been  here,  for  you  look  more  gallant  for  an  eveuiug^s 
rendezvous  than  Arolhano’\^  Aud  when  Afonso  Dalboqiier- 
qiie  mounted  on  the  horse,  all  the  captains  took  horsgs 
which  the  Turks  had  abaTidoned,  and  followed  up  after  the 
enemy,  and  these,  without  making  any  further  resistance, 
turned  their  backs  and  fled  out  of  the  gate  of  the  fortress. 
And  many  others  there,  just  wherever  they  clianced  to  be, 
threw  themselves  down  from  the  walls,  in  order  to  shorten 
tllbir  journey. 

As  soon  as  the  fortress  had  boon  abandoned,  Afonso  Dal- 
boquerque  gave  order.s  that  the  gates  should  be  shut  that 
led  to  the  city,  and  a good  watch  kept  over  them,  in  order 
that  our  men  should  not  follow  the  Moors,  nor  disband 
themselves  to  plunder.  Igor  he  feared  -that  as  the  enemy 
were  very  numerous,  they  would  uuite  together,  and  bring 

' Tho  Ktaperor  Aurelian,  whose  reign  presents  a succession  of  bril- 
liant exploita  wliich  restored  for  a time  their  ancient  lustre  to  the  arms 
of  Uoim*.  in  a war  against  th(»  Sannatians  he  was  believed  to  have 
sliiin  torty-vight  of  the  erieiify  in  One  day. 


A KONSO  DA LUOQTJ K ItQL'  K,. 


about  another  cntastropho  like  tliat  which  boh*l  the  \ ortu- 
^iiese  at  Calicut.’  So  ho  gave  orders  to  all  the  ca])Uinis  to 
take  up  positions  in  the  walla  ot  the  tortress  ; tor  he  h.id 
made  up  his  mind  to  fortify  him.self  in  it.  The  'rurks  in- 
deed were  so  dismayed,  that  those  who  nianan^ed  to  escape 
from  the  fury  of  our  soldiers  made  their  way  in  flight  over 
towards  lienastarim,  with  theiobject  of  passing  over  Irgrn 
that  place  to  the  opposite  side  of  the  mainland.  And  they 
went  on  so  excited  by  fear,  that  witbout  waiting  lor  aJiy 
vessel  of  transport  they  swam  across  the  river,  and  thereby 
many  of  them  were  drowned  ami  many  borses  were  lost. 

d'he  city  had  now  been  entered,  and  when  Afonso  Dalbo- 
qiienpto  perceived  that  the  fortress  was  .strongly  fortified 
with  artillery,  and  tlio  embrasures  eoverc<l  with  clay  out- 
side, in  order  to  deceive  our  people  if  they  attackml  them, 
ho  offered  np  many  thanks  to  our  f.ord  for  thus  delivering 
them  from  the  dangers  which  had  been  p in  paired  against 
tlicm,  had  they  operated  against  the  foi  tiaess,  as  tlie  eap- 
tains  had  thought  tlnw  ought  to  havi'  dune.  Out  ot  our 
party,  cuie  hundreil  aud  fifty  soldier.s  wtu'o  wounded  ; and 
of  the  'FiddlxjoA  and  captains,  Manuel  do  Lacerda,  who  was 
tho  tirst  who  went  in  at  tlu^  gate  and  the  first  who  receiv(‘d 
any  wounds  (for  thus  I found  it  written),  and  (bespar  do 
j’aiva,  Manuel  da  Cuiiha,  1).  doao  de  Jjma,  (:i:is[air  ('ao, 
Simao  Daiidrade,  Diuis  Fcrmindcz,  and  all  tlie  rest  who  were 
in  the  advauco  guard.  And  sovmi  wen^  killed,  of  whom  one 
was  D.  Jeronymo  do  Lima,  who  was  mortally  wounded  at 
tlie  entry  of  tliG;gate  of  the  fortress.  And  while  ho  lay  on 
the  ground  so  severely  struck  that  ho  could  not  survive, 
lii.s  brotlier,  D.  doao  de  Lima,  who  wa.s  wliecdmg  round 
with  othcr.s,  ( ame  l>cheld  him  m 

such  a condition,  with  hii  liead  leaning  against  tho  wall,  he 
exclaimed,  with  many  tears  What  is  this,  brother  how 
art  thou  V’  D.  Jeronymo  replied  I am  ou  the  point  of 
‘ SCO  vol.  11,  V- 


14 


C0MMENTAEIE8  0? 


finishing  this  journey;  and  1 am  glad^  as  it  has  pleased  our 
Lord  to  require  this  service  of  me,  that  it  has  been  com- 
pleted here  in  his  sei^vice  and  in  that  of  the  King  of  Portugal/' 
D.  Jofto  de  Lima  desired  to  remain  in  company  with  him; 
but  he  said  : — ''  Brother,  there  is  no  time  for  yon  to  remain 
with  me ; go  and  perform  what  is  required  of  you,  I will 
remain  here^  and  finish  my  days,  for  I have  no  longer 
any  strength  left/^  So  D.  Jofto  de  Lima  left  him,  and  went 
on,  following  after  the  Moors ; and  when  the  fortress  had 
been  captured  and  the  Moors  driven  out,  he  returned  to 
seek  after  his  brother,  and  found  him  already  dead.  I 
should  be  very  glad  to  have  been  either  ^ne  of  these  two 
brothers;  but  I know  not  how  to  decide  which  one  of  the  two 
I most  envy, — whether  D.  Jofto  de  Lima,  because  he  went  to 
fight  where  such  another  one  as  himself  could  be  met  with, 
or  D.  Jeronymo  de  Lima,  who  did  not  desire  to  remedy  his 
wounds,  although  they  were  mortal  (it  being  a very  natural 
thing  for  men  to  desire  to  live),  but  rather  sought  to  advance 
his  brother's  honour,  and  would  not  consent  to  his  remain- 
ing behind  with  him  at  a time  when  the  other  Fidalgos  axfB 
cavaliers  wore  carrying  on  the  fight  with  the  Turks  within 
the  fortress.  The  decision  of  this  I leave  to  those  who  read 
the  lessons  of  this  history;  let  them  judge  whether  of  these 
two  brothers  best  performed  his  obligations. 

They  killed  also  Andr^  do  Afonseca,  Antonio  Graces,  and 
•Alvaro  Gomes,  son  of  the  abnoxarife^  of  Alenquer,  and 
others,  whose  names  are  not  known.  But  they  who  (Jied 
and  they  who  remained  alive  so  performe<f  their  task,  not 
only  in  the  attack  on  the  City,  but  in  all  the  other  conflicts 
in  which  they  found  themselves  this  day  engaged  with  the 
enemy,  that  it  is  worthy  #hat  they  should  be  held  in  great 
remembrance ; for,  in  thus  gaining  Goa,  the  possession  of 
India  became  secured  [to  Portugal], 

* Almoxari/e^  a receiver  of  customs  or  dues  for  commodities  imported 
or  exported.  Arabic,  Al  moehrify  an  inspector. — ^Bngelmann. 


AFOKSO  DALBOQUERQUIS. 


15 


Nor  should  auyone  forget  Diogo  Mondez  de  Vaaooncelos 
And  those  of  his  company,  for  the  alacrity  and  powerful 
efforts  with  which  he  relieved  our  soldiers,  when  a great 
number  of  them  had  already  been  wounded,  contributed  in 
a great  measure  towards  the  capture  of  the  fortress.  And^ 
indeed,  Afonso  Dalboquerque  was  so  very  well  aware  of  the 
powerful  efforts  and  discretion  of  Diogo  Mendez,  that  ho 
often  declared  to  him,  when  they  were  at  variance  respect- 
ing his  voyage  to  Malaca  T abhor  the  life  that  I lead, 
Sir  Diogo  Mendez,  for  my  tenure  of  the  supreme  office  here 
has  done  you  harm.^*  Thus  it  was  that  if  our  soldiers, 
after  the  first  capture  of  this  city,  were  considered  to  have 
been  ill-advised  to  evacuate  it,  in  this  second  capture  they 
recovered  their  prestige  in  returning  to  take  it  by  force  of 
arms,  putting  to  death,  besides  many  other  natives  of  the 
city,  two  thousand  men,  whites,  Turks,  Humes,  and  Cora- 
qones,  which  produced,  indeed,  a terrible  dread  throughout 
all  the  land,  on  accdlllnt  of  the  great  confidence  that  had 
hitherto  been  reposed  in  their  invincibility. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

How  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  gave  the  soMiers  poruiission  to 
sack  the  city : and,  of  the  crucifix  which  was  found  in  some  old 
walls  from  which  stone  was  taken  for  the  fortress:  and  of  the 
miracle  which  Our  Lord  performed  for  our  side  on  the  day  of  the  - 
battle. 

Directly  it  wrfh  reported  in  Cochi ra  that  the  great  Afonso 
Dalboquerque  had  taken  Goa,  the  captains  who  were  there 
loading  their  ships  to  set  out  for  Portugal,  calling  to  mind 
how  he  had  told  them  that  beft)ro  their  departure  they 
should  have  news  of  the  taking  of  Goa,  became  very  sad 
and  full  of  shame,  when  they  knew  of  it,  because  they  had 
not  been  with  him  in  that  enterprise. 

After  having  commanded  the  captains  to  take  up  their 


positions  and  guArd  tho  fortress,  Afonso  Dalboquerque  gave 
permission  to  the  soldiers  to  sack  the  city,  and  free  right 
to  keep  everything  they  took ; but  as  for  his  own  share,  he 
cared  for  nothing  moro  lhan  the  contentment  derived  for 
having  been  enabled  to  keep  liis  word,  which  ho  had  given 
to  the  Ilidalc&o  when  he  was  in  Goa,  as  has  already  been 
related.  ^ 

In  tho  city  wore  captured  a hundred  large  guns  (horn- 
hardas)  and  a large  (piantity  of  smaller  artillery,  and  two 
hundred  horses,  and  many  supplies  and  munitions  of  war. 
All  these  wore  onlei'ed  to  be  delivered  to  the  factor  for  the 
king.  And  after  the  city  had  been  pillaged,  Afonso  Dalbo- 
querqiio  told  the  captains  to  reconnoitre  the  whole  of  the 
island  and  to  put  to  tho  sword  all  tho  Moors,  men,  women, 
and  children,  that  should  be  found,  and  to  give  no  quarter 
to  any  one  of  them ; for  bis  determination  was  to  leave  no 
seed  of  this  I'ace  throughout  the  whole  of  tho  island.  And 
ho  did  this,  not  only  ])eeaiise  it  was  ne^ssary  for  the  security 
of  the  land  that  there  should  be  none  but  Hindoos  within  it, 
but  also  as  a punislmient  for  the  treachery  of  which  the  Moors 
had  been  guilty  when  ho  took  the  city  for  the  first  time. 
And  for  four  days  continuously  they  poured  out  the  blood 
of  the  Moors  who  w^ore  found  therein ; aftd  it  was  ascer- 
tained that  of  men,  women,  and  children,  the  number  ex- 
ceeded six  thousand. 

, The  Hindoos,  also,  for  their  part,  by  reason  of  the  hatred 
in  which  they  held  the  Turks,  because  they  had  been  de- 
prived there  of  the  lands  whereon  they  lived^as  soon  as  they 
heard  the  news  of  the  fall  of  Goa  (the  principal  men,  with 
their  dependents,  having  fled  up  into  tho  mountain  country), 
descended,  and  cut  off  Jlio  Moors’  r<Hreat  through  the 
passes,  as  they  were  flying  from  the  fury  of  I;ho  Portuguese^ 
And  when'  they  had  taken  from  them  all  they  carried,  they 
put  them  all  to  the  sword,  without  saving  any  lives.  Now, 
in  the  company  of  thes^e  Turks  they  killed  one  who  was  tliOK, 


AFONSO  DALBOQUEBQUB. 


17 


treasurer  and  paymaster  of  the  Hidalclo's  forces;  and 
from  him  they  took  all  the  money  he  had.  And  Afonso 
Dalboquerque  ordered  that  a certain  mosque  should  be 
filled  with  some  Moors  whom  the  Hindoos  had  taken 
prisoners,  and  then  set  on  fire,  and  in  this  body  of  people 
was  a renegade  Christian  who  deserted  to  the  Hidalcfto 
when  Goa  was  taken  for  the  fiyst  time. 

As  soon  as  the  despoiling  of  the  land  had  been  accom- 
plished, Afonso  Dalboquerque  turned  his  attention  without 
delay  to  the  fortifications  of  the  city,  and  ordered  that  a 
great  quantity  of  cement  should  be  prepared,  and  a41  the 
sepulchres  of  thp  Moors  thrown  down,  in  order  to  obtain 
plenty  of  stone  for  the  works,  and  to  all  the  captains  and  fidal^ 
gos  he  appointed  a regular  turn  of  duty,  and  so  made  great 
haste  to  complete  the  work ; for  ho  was  fearful  of  the  arrival 
of  the  Hidalcfto,  and  would  not  that  ho  should  find  him  in 
an  unprepared  state.  And,  as  he  hoped  to  establish  in  Goa 
the  principal  seat  of  Qie  Governors  of  India,  he  so  arranged 
the  plan,  that  the  palace  of  the  ^abaio  remained  within  the 
boundary,  because  the  edifices  of  it  were  very  noMy  designed, 
a work  of  great  beauty  and  finely  built.  And  by  reason  of 
this  great  diligence,  in  a very  short  time  he  ronipleted  the 
fortress  where  if  now  stands,  with  its  to  .^ers  and  ditches, 
with  their  breastworks,  for  the  defence  of  the  harbour  and 
anchorage  of  the  ships. 

At  this  time  some  men  were  progressing  with  the  de- 
struction of  some  old  walla,  in  order  to  get  stones  for  the 
works  of  defence,  when  they  discovered  in  the  foundations^ 
an  image  of  the  crucifix  in  copper.  When  the  news  of 
this  ran  through  the  citjj^  Afonso  Dalboquerque  came  down 
at  once  with  all  thi  people  and  dergy  who  were  with  him, 
and  they  carrieiJ  the  crucifix,  with  great  devotion  and  many 
tears,  to  the  church.  Great  wonder  was  there  that  then 

^ AlicerceSf"  aUo  found  as  alicesse  and  alicece^  from  the  Arabic 
^he  oement  of  a building. 


VOL.  in. 


18 


COXKBNTAJBISS  OF 


seised  upon  all  bSliolders ; for  within  the  memory  of  man 
there  was  no  record  of  any  Christians  ever  having  been  at 
that  placOi  and  they  believed  that  our  Lord  had  sent  down 
that  sign  from  Heaven,  in  order  to  shew  that  it  was  his 
will  that  the  kingdom  should  belong  to  the  King  of  Portugal 
and  not  to  the  Hidalcfto,  and  that  thoir  mosques  should  be- 
come houses  of  prayer,^  whesein  his  name  should  be  Wor- 
shipped. For  whereas  the  city  was  very  strongly  garrisoned 
and  provided  with  artillery  and  arms,  and  all  other  things 
necessary  for  its  defence,  our  people  had  not  been  sufficient 
— being  so  few  in  number — to  take  it,  had  there  not  been 
within  it  this  signal  of  the  Cross  whereon  our  Lord  suffered, 
which  called  upon  them  as  it  were,  and  gave  them  the 
power  to  attack  the  city  ; had  it  not  been  also  for  the 
Apostle  Sanctiago,  who  helped  them,  whereof  the  ^ery 
Moors  boro  good  testimony,  to  the  effect  that  after  the  fall 
of  the  city  they  inquired  of  our  men  what  manner  of  man 
was  that  captain  with  shining  armour  and  a red  cross, 
who  marched  with  the  Christians,  striking  and  killing  the 
Moors,  for  H,  was  he  alone  that  had  taken  their  city  from 
them. 

And  Afonso  Dalboquerque,  not  only  from  the  great  de- 
votion which  he  had  for  this  saint,  but  because  he  was  a 
knight  of  the  order  of  the  saint,  did  not  forget  this  favour 
which  he  had  received  from  him ; and  he  sent  to  the  con- 
vent of  Palmela^  a staff  of  the  length  of  six  palms  and  of 
tho  thickness  of  a lance,®  all  overlaid  with  gold,  with  inlaid 
work,^  and  the  hand  of  tho  staff  covered  with  pearls  and 

’ Isaiah  Ivi,  7 ; Math,  xxi,  13  ; Mark  xi,  17  ; Luke  xix,  46, 

* Palraola,  a town  in  Portugal,  south  oCLisbon,  38  deg.  84  min.  N, ; 

8 deg.  67  min.  W . Bluteau  gi#s  an  interesting' Eiccount  of  its  history. 
The  convent  is  the  head  of  the  Military  Order  of  Santiago,  and  i»  kept 
by  Brethren  of  the  Rule  of  St.  Augiistine. 

* Arremcfdo. 

* Lavrado  de  Tauxia ; Tauxia  or  aluxia^  damaskeening  or  inlaying  of 
one  metal  upon  another;  froig  the  Arabic  aldanchiya^  to  colour,  to  render  v., 


AFONSO  DALBOQUFRQUX* 


19 


rubies,  and  a penitential  scourge  of  vei^  large  beads  of 
gold,  and  a shelP  of  gold  of  good  size,  with  many  precious 
stones  in  it,  placed  upon  a hat  of  crimson  satin ; and  at  his 
death  he  bequeathed  to  the  Apostle  Sanctiago  of  Galiza^  a 
very  large  lampstand  of  silver,  and  a hundred  thousand  rds^ 
in  cash  for  oil. 

When  this  news  of  the  taking  of  Goa  reached  Cambaya, 
and  it  became  known  that  Afonso  Dalboquerque  was  fortify- 
ing himself  therein,  with  intent  to  maintain  his  position,  tho 
king  perceived  that  his  own  league  was  destroyed,  and 
therefore  ordered  the  liberation  of  the  prisoners  whom  he 
Lad  captured  when  D.  Afonso  Noronha,  the  nephew  of 
Afonso  Dalboquerque,  had  bt^en  taken  prisoner,  and  also 
offered  to  give  up  Din  for  the  site  of  a Portuguese  fortress  j 
and  from  that  time  forward  the  king  continually  sent  am- 
bassadors to  treat  for  peace.  And  Mirocem/  captain  of  the 
fleet  of  the  Grand  Sultan,  who  was  in  Cambaya  (with  some 
of  the  forces  that  had  escaped  from  the  rout  inflicted  upon 
them  by  the  Viceroy‘s),  where  he  was  awaiting  tho  relief  for 
which  he  had  sent  to  Cairo,  in  order  to  refit  his  forces  at 
Goa,  no  sooner  learned  that  Goa  was  taken  (and  that,  too, 
with  great  havoc  among  tho  Turks),  than  ho  gave  up  all 
hopes  of  bringing  his  mission  to  a fortunate  terminatiou, 
and  obtained  permission  from  the  King  of  Carnboya  to  go 
to  Juda,®  whore  ho  remained  for  some  days,  and  from  that 
port  set  out  for  Suez  by  sea  in  a sliallop,^  wliere  ho  found 

beautiful ; in  Portuguefie  tho  word  haa  the  more  limited  meaning  given 
above. 

1 Vieira,  This  word  gives  the  name  to  a large  number  of  Portuguese 
families.  Among  others  wlio  have  home  it,  is  the  author  of  tlie  well- 
known  Portuguese  Girammar  and  Portuguesc-English  J dctionaiies. 

* Gallicia.  ^ 

♦ About  £20  168.  8d.  of  EagUeh  money, -a  large  sum  in  those  days. 

* See  vol.  i,  p.  222  ; vol.  ii,  p.  U2. 

“ At  Diu.  See  vol.  ii,  pp.  112,  ltr>,  note.~f.Waf/r(,  x,  !U-36. 

• Djeddah.  See  vol.  i,  p.  234. 

t Oelua.  See  jelun^  vol.  i,  p.  226,  note. 


. 0 2 


20 


COMMSNTARIES  Of 


the  fleet  in  progress  of  preparation.  And  when  Mirooera 
thus  arrived  at  Cairo  to  impart  this  news  of  the  taking  of 
Goa  to  the  Sultan,  orders  were  given  to  stop  the  building 
of  the  fleet,  and  no  more  trouble  was  taken  about  it.  The 
ambassador  of  the  King  of  Cainbaya  was  thereupon  des- 
patched with  orders  to  report  that  on  the  completion  of  the 
fortress,  Afonso  Dalboquerque  would  come  and  visit  the 
king  and  arrange  the  terms  of  peace.  And  because  Afonso 
Dalboquerque  was  -desirous  of  sounding  the  wishes  of  the 
Hidalcfto  relative  to  an  alliance,  he  wrote  the  following 
letter  to  him,  with  certain  grandiloquent  ideas'  involved  in 
it;  for,  as  long  as  he  governed  India,  he^  always  availed 
himself,  first  of  one  thing,  then  of  another,  in  his  intercourse 
with  the  kings. 

Letter  which  the  great  Afonso  Dalboqurrque  wrote  to 

THE  HiDALCAO  as  SOON  AS  GoA  HAD  BEEN  TAKEN. 

'^Yery  honoimible  and  good  Cavalier  Milohau ! the  great 
Afonso  Dalboquerque,  Captain-General ' of  India  and  of 
the  Kingdom  and  lordship  of  Ormuz  and  of  the  King- 
dom and  Lordship  of  Goa,  for  the  very  high  and  very 
powerful  D.  Manuel,  King  of  Portugal  and  of  the^Algarves, 
on  this  side  and  on  that  of  the  sea,  in  Africa  Lord  of  Guin^, 
and  of  the  Conquest,  Navigation,  and  Commerce  of  Ethiopia, 
Arabia,  Persia,  and  of  India,  I send  you  my  greeting.  You 
must  well  know  how  the  (JJabayo,  your  father,  used  to  take 
the  ships  of  Malabar  out  of  the  ports  and  harbours  of  .the 
King  my  Lord;  wherefore  it  was  that  I wa^ constrained  to 
go  against  Goa,  and  take  the  city,  and  there  it  is  that  I 
am  occupied  in  building  a very  strong  fortress.  I wish 
^ most  sincerely  that  youi*  father  had  been  Jiving,  that  he 
might  know  me  to  be  a man  of  my  word : out  of  regard  for 
him,  1 shall  be  ever  your  friend,  and  I will  assist  you 

* Reholana$y  an  unoommon  word,  probably  derived  from  reholar^  to 
roll  about. 


A70N80  DALfiOQUEBQUE. 


21 


against  the  King  of  Decan^  and  against  your  enemies ; and 
I will  cause  all  the  horses^  that  arrive  here  to  be  carried  to 
your  stations  and  your  marts,  in  order  that  you  may  have 
possession  of  them.  Fain  would  1 that  the  Merchants  of 
your  land  would  come  with  white  stuffs  and  all  manner  of 
merchandize  to  this  port,  and  take  to  yours  in  exchange 
merchandize  of  the  sea  and  of  the  land,  and  horses,  and  I 
will  give  them  a safe  conduct.  If  you  wish  for  my  friend- 
ship, let  your  messengers  come  to  me  with  your  communica- 
tions, and  I will  send  you  others  on  my  part,  who  shall  con- 
vey to  you  my  communications:  if  you  will  perform  this 
which  I write  unto  you,  by  my  aid  shall  yoi^  be  able  to  gain 
possession  of  much  land,  and  become  a great  Lord  among 
the  Moors.  Bo  desirous  of  performing  this,  for  thus  it 
shall  be  well  with  you,  and  you  shall  have  groat  power ; 
and  for  all  that  the  Qabayo,  your  father,  be  dead,  I will  be 
your  father,  pud  bring  you  up  like  a son.  Let  your  messen- 
ger bring  back  immediately  to  me  a reply,  and  let  the 
merchants  of  the  land  come  under  safe-conduct  to  Goa;  and 
as  for  the  Merchants  who  bring  merchandize  and  come 
under  your  letters  of  safe  conduct,  signed  by  your  hand,  I 
will  be  responsible  for  their  safety/* 


CHAPTER  V. 

Hov  the  Nttquibares  sent  to  request  a safe  conduct  from  Afonao  Dalbo- 
querque,  in  c^der  that  they  might  come  an<l  live  at  Goa ; and  how 
our  forces  put  to  rout  Meliqutwiyc,  the  captain  of  the  Uidalcilo. 

When  the  Nequibares,  who  were  stationed  on  the  main- 
land, perceived  tKat  the  great  -Afonso  Dalboquerquo  was 

establishing  himself  firmly  in  Goa,  they  sent  to  desire  a safe 
• 

» The  horae  trade  was  a great  source  of  employment  and  revenue  on 
the  Indian  coast.— See  voL  ii,  pp.  76, 77,  107,  111 ; see  also  Col  Yule, 
Marco  Polo^  vol.  i,  pp.  84,  88,  B24, 333,  et«.,  and  Index ; 2nd  edition. 


22 


COHHSNTARIfiS  OF 


conduct  from  him  in  order  that  they  might  come  over  with 
all  their  people  and  live  in  the  city.  These  Nequibares 
were  the  principal  men  and  captains  of  the  people.  Now, 
whereas  Afonso  Dalboquerque  was  anxious  of  gathering  to- 
gether into  the  city  all  the  native  Hindoos  of  the  land,  he 
was  very  glad  of  the  offers  of  those  Nequibares,  for  he  was 
in  hopes  that  they  would  help  him  in  the  construction  of 
the  fortims,  so  ho  sent  them  the  safe  conduct  which  they 
had  desired  him  to ‘give;  and  when  they  arrived  in  Goa  he 
gave  them  houses  and  possessions  according  to  each  one's 
station  of  life  on  the  mainland.  And  after  he  had  sent 
messengers  to  |ihia  effect  to  the  Noquibarq^,  news  reached 
him  that  Meliqueaye,i  captain  of  the  Hidalcab,  had  arrived 
with  a largo  body  of  men  at  (Jondal,  and  at  Banda,  with 
the  intention  of  forcing  an  entrance  into  the  island  of  Goa. 
And  although  Afonso  Dalboquerque  was  fully  occupied  in 
the  work  upon  the  fortress,  because  he  felt  sq  strongly  the 
necessity  of  finishing  it  as  quickly  as  ho  could,  nevertheless 
he  could  not  endure  that  a captain  of  the  Hidalcao  should 
come  and  besiege  the  lands  of  Goa  while  he  was  in  the 
island;  he  therefore  lost  no  time  in  despatching  Diogo 
Fernandez  de  B^ja  to  sail  into  the  Kiver  of  Bandd,  and  dis- 
pute  the  passage  with  Meliqueaye  in  the  lands  of  Antuge 
and  baste.  And  with  him  he  sent  also,  as  captains  of  the 
vessels,  Aires  Pereira,  Antonio  Dabrea,  Gaspar  CSo,  and 
Antonio  de  Matos,  with  two  hundred  men. 

Diogo  Fernandez,  as  soon  as  he  was  ready,  set  out  with 
his  people,  and  reached  Bandd,  and  went  ujf  the  river,  and 
without  any  further  consideration  disembarked  iibmediately. 
When  Meliqueaye  perceived  that  our  men  had  disembarked,* 
he  ^proceeded  to  attack  them,  relying  u^on  the  numerous 
bodies  of  Turks  who  were  under  his  command,  and  Diogo 
Fernandez  waited  for  them  with  great  bravery,  and  plied 

> The  tirst  part  of  this  name  is  Mekk^  Ix)rd.  yol.  u,  pp  86,  86 
for  names  similarly  formed,  # * 


AFONSO  DAI.BOQXIKRQUE. 


23 


the  enemy  so  fiercely  with  lances,  that  the  Turks,  dision- 
certed  by  the  determined  resistance  with  which  our  people 
awaited  them  on  foot,  took  to  their  horses  and  retreated  in 
so  disorderly  a manner,  that  many  throw  themselves  down 
over  the  ravines  and  there  ended  their  days. 

With  this  victory,  Diogo  Fernandez  returned  to  Goa,  and 
related  to  Afonso  Dalboquorque  all  that  had  taken  place, 
and  declared  how  Meliquoaye  was  making  his  way  in  the 
direction  of  Divarij,  in  order  to  cross  over  into  the  island 
[of  Goa]  in  that  direction.  With  this  news  of  the  intentions 
of  Meliqueaye,  which  Diogo  Fernandez  brought  him,  Afonso 
Dalboquerquo  jforthwith  dispatched  Gaspar  do  Pavia  to  pro* 
ceed  to  guard  that  pass,  and  in  company  with  him  there 
went  Afonso  Pessoa,  Martim  Guedez,  Vasco  Fernandez 
Coutinho,  and  many  others.  Meliqueaye,  fi  tiding  himself  dis- 
comfited by  the  inability  of  his  people,  withdrew  with  the 
shattered  remains  of  his  forces,  and  made  his  way  to  essay 
the  entrance  to  the  island  by  the  pass  of  Divarij.  But,  on 
arriving  there,  although  he  went  carelessly,  with  the  idea 
that  ho  would  not  find  anyone  there  to  resist  him,  inasmuch 
as  he  was  by  nature  very  proud,  nevertheless  he  made  up 
his  mind  to  lay  siege  to  the  stockades  which  Gaspar  do 
Paiva  had  by  that  time  constructed,  and  drew  up  his  forces, 
both  infantry  and  cavalry,  in  battle  array,  with  himself  in 
the  front  rank,  and  made  his  way  to  attack  them. 

But  Gaspar  Je  Paiva,  who  had  already  received  notice  of 
approach  of  Meliqueaye,  awaited  the  attacjk  with  great 
I'eadiness,  and  at  the  first  encounter  bis  matchlockmen  slew 
some  of  the  mounted  Turks ; and  those,  according  to  their 
custom,  used  to  ride  fastened  into  their  saddles  with  straps, 
so  that  the  horses,  having  no  longer  any  riders  to  govern 
them,  ran  among  their  own  people  and  threw  them  into  dis- 
order. As  soon  as  Gaspar  de  Paiva  observed  that  the  Turks 
were  thrown  into  confusion,  lie  sallied  out  of  his  trenches 
and  lost  no  time  in  falling  upon,  the  enemy,  and  routed 


24 


COMMINTABIES  Of 


thefn^  and  followed  up  after  them  for  a good  space.  Vasco 
Fernandez  Coutinho,  although  at  that  time  ho  was  but  a 
lad  of  eighteen  years  of  age,  encountered  a Turk  on  a 
horse,  and  taking  him  by  the  reins,  raised  up  his  caparison 
and  stabbed  him  with  a sword ; and.  when  the  horse  fell 
down  dead,  he  fell  upon  the  Turk,  and  cut  off  his  head,  and 
thus  at  that  day  of  the  fight, showed  himself  to  be  a son 
worthy  of  his  sire,  a descendant  worthy  of  his  ancestors. 

When  the  affair  was  thus  terminated,  Gaspar  de  Paiva 
withdrew  to  his  stockade,  and  Mehqneaye,  finding  himself 
sorely  pressed  by  our  men  on  both  sides,  no  longer  ventured 
to  attack  them,  but  withdrew  with  his  men  two  leagues 
away  into  the  interior  country,  to  a place  which  is  called 
Diocalij,  and  there  he  pitched  his  camp,  making  some  very 
strong  stockades  of  wood  for  its  defence,  in  case  he  should 
be  attacked  there.  As  .soon  as  Afonso  Dalboquerque  per- 
ceived that  Meliqueaye  was  thus  put  to  rout  and  it  was  pro- 
bable, in  case  of  his  being  attacked  at  ofice,  that  this  chief 
might  easily  fall  into  his  hands,  he  proceeded  himself  to 
seek  for  him,  in  the  place  where  the  camp  was  pitched,  with 
one  thousand  Portuguese,  and  two  thousand  natives  com- 
manded by  their  own  captains,  and  passed  over  to  the 
mainland  in  tho  galleys  and  boats.  And  ds  soon  as  the 
force  had  disembarked,  Afonso  Dalboquerque  divided  it 
into  four  battalions,  and  stationed  them  in  certain  passes, 
about  the  distance  from  the  edge  of  the  sea  of  a shot  from 
a matchlock,  and  there  he  arranged  an  ambush,  and  ordered 
the  captains  of  the  Hindoos  to  take  their  soldiers  and  run 
to  tho  enemy’s  camp,  and  in  case  any  Turks  should  issue 
out  after  them,  they  were  to  retreat  in  the  direction  of  the 
place  where  he  had  placed  tho  ambush. 

■ The  captains  of  the  Hindoos,  as  soon  as  they  came  in 
sight  of  the  camp,  found  Meliqueaye  outside  the  stockades, 
drawn  up  on  a lofty  hill  with  h'is  army,  like  a man  who  was 
well  aware  of  the  trap  laid  for  him  by  Afonso  Dalboquerque. 


AFONSO  DALBOQUEEQUB. 


25 


But  as  be  was  a good  captain^  and  well  versed  in  the  art  of 
war,  be  remained  perfectly  quiet,  and  would  not  attack  the 
Hindoos.  So  when  the  captains  observed  that  Meliqueayo 
did  not  care  to  meddle  with  them,  they  withdrew  to  the 
place  where  Afonso  Dalboquerque  was  waiting  (for  he  had 
given  them  the  order  to  do  so  in  this  case),  and  related  to 
him  the  position  of  the  affair  as  they  had  found  it.  And 
Afonso  Dalboquerque,  perceiving  thus  that  Moliqueaye  had 
become  aware  of  his  plan,  proceeded  to  the  Island  of 
Divarij,  and  therein  ho  left  Jlodrigo  Rabelo  and  ManuqJ 
de  Lacerda,  with  soldiers,  and  then  he  went  on  to  the  city. 

After  the  lapse  of  a few  days,  Meliqueaye,  who  found 
himself  not  sufficiently  strong  to  bo  able  to  resist  our 
people  if  they  were  to  desire  to  invade  him,  sent  a messenger 
to  Afonso  Dalboquerque  desiring  peace  with  him.  But 
Afonso  Dalboquerque  demanded  of  the  messenger  whether 
Meliqueayo  held  a permission  from  the  Hidalcfto  to  enter 
into  negotiations  for  peace  or  not.  The  mossengor  replied 
that  the  only  message  he  carried  was  from  Meliqueaye, 
who  was  a captain  of  the  IlidalcAo,  and  could  not  enter  into 
peace  without  the  permission  of  the  Hidalcao.  Afonso 
Dalboquerque  therefore  disj)atched  tho  messenger  back 
without  any  ref)ly,  for  !t  appeared  to  him  when  he  reflected 
upon  the  disorganised  proceedings  of  Meliqueaye,  that  his 
stay  there  could  not  bo  in  accordance  with  the  wishes  of 
the  Hidalc^. 


CHAmm  VI. 

How  Merlao  tame  to  Goa,  and  the  Nequibares  desired  Afonso  Dalbo- 
querqvie  to  give  him  to  them  for^heir  governor,  and  what  took 
plaiCe  thereupon ; and  how  he  ordered  Diogo  Fennmdez  de  to 
destroy  the  fortress  of  (Jacotoi  JL 

For  some  days  past,  a messenger  from  the  King  of  Onor 
had  been  staying  in  Goa,  seeking  to  conclude  an  alliunoe 


26 


COMMKNTABIES  OP 


with  the  great  Afonso  Balboquerque  ; for  this  king  had 
usurped  the  kingdom  and  ejected  from  it  Merlao,  to  whom 
it  belonged  by  right  of  being  the  elder  brother ; and  there- 
fore the  king  was  very  much  in  fear  that  Afonso Dalboquerque 
would  favour  Merlao  in  opposition  to  him,  in  consequence 
of  the  undertaking  which  ho  had  given  to  the  Portuguese 
to  help  them  in  their  first  'enterprise  against  Goa.  As 
soon  as  Merlao  (who  at  this  period  was  in  Baticala  with  the 
king,  his  uncle,  in  possession  of  soldiers  on  foot  and  horse, 
yith  the  intention  of  sotting  out  to  recover  his  kingdom 
if  he  could)  became  awaro  that  his  brother  was  nego- 
tiating with  Afonso  Dalboquerque,  in  ordey  to  benefit  him- 
self by  such  an  alliance,  he  sent  a messenger  with  letters 
informing  Afonso  Dalboquerque  of  the  position  in  which 
the  matter  stood,  and  telling  him  how  his  brother  had 
risen  up  against  him,  and  deprived  him  of  the  kingdom  by 
force,  begging  Afonso  Dalboquerquo  to  help  him  with  his 
alliance,  and  stipulating  that  ho  w^ould  servo  the  King  of 
Portugal  in  all  that  might  be  commanded  of  him.  And 
Afonso  Dalboquerque  accepted  his  offers,  not  only  because 
his  fame  was  great  as  a brave  cavalier,  but  also  because  he 
was  a captain  whom  the  Hindoos  held  in  great  esteem. 
And  this  he  did  with  the  intention  bf  conferring  upon  him 
the  government  of  the  lands  of  Goa;  for  he  had  been 
brought  up  there,  and  had  always  made  war  upon  the  Turks, 
and  on  two  occasions,  when  ho  had  been  besieged  by  them, 
with  his  Hindoos  alone  he  had  defended  the  city  like  a vpry 
valiant  cavalier;  and  with  this  determinatfon,  because  it 
seemed  to  him  to  be  very  conducive  to  the  service  of  the 
King  Dorn  Manuel  to  re-establish  Merlao  and  shew  him 
favours,  Afonso  DalboqueiK)ue  sent  to  BSticala  the  galleys 
for  him,  with  some  vessels  for  the  transport  of  his  men 
and  horses.  And  he  also  sent  two  Portuguese  captains, 
with  two  thousand  Hindoo  soldiers,  to  go  by  land  and 
receive  him  at  Cintdeora,  carrying  letter^  to  the  Tana- 


AF0K80  DALBOQDBRQUE. 


27 


dares^  and  people  of  the  lands  of  Goa,  ordering  them  to 
receive  him  and  obey  him  as  they  would  Afonso  Dalboquer- 
qne  himself.  And  all  these  people  did  so  with  great  de  - 
light, by  reason  of  the  estimation  in  which  they  hold  him, 
for  they  were  desirous  of  being  governed  by  him. 

The  brother,  who  was  in  Onor,  being  informed  that 
Merlao  had  come  to  Cintdcora  to  embark,  immediately  sent 
some  of  his  people  to  Caribal  and  Ancola  (two  places  which 
lie  in  front  of  Cinticora,  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  river, 
where  the  Kingdom  of  Goa  is  divided  from  that  of  Onor), 
to  labour  to  prevent  his  passage,  promising  them  great  i;0- 
wards  if  they  captured  him  ; for  he  was  alarmed  lest  Afonso 
Dalboquerque  should  assist*  him  in  his  attempt  to  cast  him 
out  of  the  kingdom.  But,  notwithstanding  all  those  en- 
deavours which  his  brother  made,  Merlao  conductod  himself 
with  such  skill,  that  he  passed  over  without  any  conflict 
with  the  soldiers  of  his  brother,  and  reached  Goa  (taking 
with  him  a captain  of  the  King  of  Narsiuga,  who  was  called 
IcaraOj  who  for  days  past  had  been  in  his  company,  in  dis- 
cord with  the  king),  where  he  was  received  with  groat 
pleasure  by  Afonso  Dalboquerque,  who  ordered  that  he 
should  bo  lodged  in  the  principal  houses  of  the  city,  and  in- 
structed the  fabtor  to  supply  him  with  everything  he  or  his 
people  should  require. 

The  Nequibarcs  were  so  delighted  at  the  arrival  of  Mer- 
lao, that  it  was  not  many  days  before  they  went  to  Afonso 
Dqlboquerque  [and  begged  him]  to  give  him  to  them  as 
their  governor,  for  all  the  people  desired  him.  And  Afonso 
Dalboquerque  was  very  glad  at  this  proceeding  on  their 
part,  because  this  was  the  principal  reason  why  he  had  ex- 
tended his  assistance  to  him ; he  told  the  Nequibares 
that  for  his  own  part  he  was  glad  of  it,  and  he  would  talK 
with  Merlao  and  then  give  thorn  a reply.  And,  on  tlje 
following  day,  in  the  morning,  Afonso  Dalboquerque  caused 
• See  vol,  ii,  f.  125,  note, 


28 


COMMENTARIES  OF 


Merlao  to  be  summoned  before  him,  and  told  him  that  he 
was  desirous  of  letting  him  hold  the  lands  of  Goa  at  a yearly 
rental,  and  of  giving  him  the  government  of  them,  provided 
that  he  would  pay  every  year  to  the  King  Dom  Manuel,  his 
Lord,  or  to  his  governors  of  India,  forty  thousand  fardaos,^ 
in  four  payments,  just  as  the  people  had  to  pay,  in  addition 
to  a payment  for  three  months,  which  the  land  still  owed  to 
the  Hidalcfio ; for  they  had  to  be  demanded  on  the  part  of 
the  King,  his  Lord.  Merlao  was  very  well  pleased. 

And  when  the  agreements  which  were  made  about  this 
m^^tter  had  been  drawn  and  signed,  Afonso  Dalboquerque 
summoned  before  him  the  Nequi bares  and  all  the  principal 
men  of  the  Hindoos,  and  took  Merlao  by  the  hand  before 
them,  and  told  them  that  he  gave  him  to  them  to  be  their 
governor,  for  he  knew  how  much  they  desired  to  have  him, 
and  how  well  they  would  be  treated  by  him ; and  they  re- 
ceived Merlao  with  great  pleasure  and  much  festivity  and 
blowing  of  horns,  in  accordance  with  their  customs.  And, 
in  two  or  three  days^  time,  Merlao  set  out,  and  crossed  over 
to  the  mainland,  taking  with  him  five  thousand  peons  and 
fifty  horsemen,  and  commenced  at  once  to  farm  his  Tam- 
darias.^ 

Now,  seeing  that  the  fortress  of  Goa  was  already  in  so 
advanced  a state  that  it  would  withstand  all  the  power  of 
the  HidalcAo,  Afonso  Dalboquerque  sent  Diogo  Fernandez 
de  B4ja,  as  chief  captain  of  three  ships,  to  dismantle  the 
fortress  of  ^acotoiA  (as  the  King  D.  Manuel  so  often  had 
ordered  to  be  done),  and  he  gave  him  a set  df  instructions 
how  he  was  to  act  in  this  business,  Iknd  there  he  was  to  re- 
main until  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  month  of  May,  for  he 

C 

' * For  the  value  of  the  pardaoy  Bce'vol.  ii,  p.  95.^  Forty  thousand 
pardaos  is  somewhat  more  than  £3000. 

» Tanadaria  is  rendered  by  Vieyra  Cahe^a  de  Comarca^  the  principal 
city  or  town  of  a Comarca  or  district ; in  this  passage  the  word  appears 
to  apply  to  the  office  or  appointment  of  a Tanada7\ 


AJONSO  DALBOQUBBQUK. 


29 


might  be  enabled  to  come  to  him,  if  the  affairs  of  India  per- 
mitted it,  as  late  as  this;  but  if  it  were  to  fall  out  that 
Afonso  Dalboquerque  could  not  be  with  him  by  that  time, 
then  Diogo  Fernandez  de  B^ja  was  to  proceed  to  Ormuz, 
with  his  lettert  and  powers  which  he  carried,  in  order  to 
receive  the  tribute,  for  Cogeatar  had  sent  word  to  say  that 
he  was  willing  to  pay  it ; and  when  this  had  been  done,  he 
was  to  make  his  way  in  the  month  of  August’  by  the  route 
to  India,  and  unite  with  the  fleet  of  Manuel  de  Lacerda, 
• who  was  to  remain  as  chief  captain  of  the  sea  while  he 
himself  (Afonso  Dalboquerque)  sailed  away  from  India,  and 
the  two  united  were  to  cruise  off  that  coast,  for  so,  if  Goa 
fell  into  any  trouble,  they  bould  succour  the  city ; and  in 
order  that  Diogo  Fernandez  might  be  the  better  entertained 
by  Cogeatar,  Afonso  Dalboquerque  gave  permission  to  all 
the  ships  of  Ormuz  that  were  in  Goa  to  carry  spices,  and 
gave  them  a safe  conduct  to  be  enabled  to  pass,  giving  them 
to  understand  that  they  were  to  come  back  direct  to  Goa 
with  the  horses  they  were  to  bring  with  them. 

And  because  Afonso  Dalboquerquo  was  in  certain  re- 
spects impeded  and  prevented  from  carrying  out  his  in- 
tended expedition  in  this  direction,  Diogo  Fernandez  de 
B4ja,  after  he  had  destroyed  the  fortress  of  (j)acotor&,  and 
the  appointed  period  of  time  had  elapsed,  made  his  way  to 
Ormuz,  and  received  the  tribute,  and  from  that  port  set 
sail  for  India,  and  found  Goa  besieged  by  the  forces  of  the 
HidalcJlo,  as  will  be  related  hereafter. 


30 


COHHXHTAR1B8  OF 


CHAPTER  Vll. 

Of  the  ftmhasfiadors  whom  the  ^amoriin,  after  tlie  fall  of  Goa,  sent  to 
the  great  Monao  Daiboquerque,  dcfdring  peace  with  him  ; and  how 
Simao  Rangel  waa  sent  upon  this  husincss,  and  what  passed  con- 
cerning it. 

I 

Whereas  the  Qamorim  had  been  inforinod  that  the  great 
Afonso  Dalboquei'qjie  had  captured  Goa,  and  was  fortifying 
himself  in  the  city  with  the  intention  of  retaining  possession  - 
of  it, — no  longer  relying  upon  the  league  which  had  been 
made  between  himself  and  the  Hidalcao  with  the  object  of 
ejecting  the  Portuguese  from  India;  and  whereas,  too,  ho 
was  aware  that  the  King  of  Caniba)'a,  another  member  of 
the  league,  had  scut  back  to  Afonso  Dalboquerque  the 
Portuguese  who  had  been  prisoners  in  his  territory;  he 
ordered  his  ambassadors  to  repair  to  Afonso  Dalboquerque, 
and  they  set  out  from  Calicut  in  and  in  a few  days 

reached  Goa.  And  when  they  had  arrived  they  sent  word 
to  Afonso  Dalboquor(juo  that  they  had  come  to  his  Lordship 
with  an  embassy  from  the  (^amorim,  and  bogged  him  of  his 
kindness  that  he  would  grant  them  a hearing. 

So  in  order  to  give  a greater,  air  of  importance  to  this 
business,  Afonso  Dalboquerque  ordered  Francisco  Pantoja, 
chief  alcaide  of  the  fortress,  to  pi’oceed  to  the  ambassadors 
and  bring  them ; while  he  himself  waited  in  the  hall  of  re- 
ception with  all  the  captains  and  Fidolgos,  and  received 
them  with  groat  expressions  of  delight  and  demonstrations 
of  being  well  pleased  with  their  friendship. 

The  ambassadors,  after  shewing  him  the  accustomed 
courtesy  according  to  their jnanner,  told  him  that  tho  Qamo- 
lim,  their  Lord,  had  sent  word  by  them  to  i^iform  him  how 
happy  ho  would  be  if  he  could  have  been  able  to  converse 
with  him,  so  that  he  could  shew  him  the  pleasure  ho  felt  in 
the  capture  of  Goa  by  the  Portuguese ; and  that  in  conse- 


AFONSO  DALBOQUEBQUE. 


31 


quenoe  of  his  desire  of  friendship  with  the  King  of  Portugal 
he  had  sent  to  make  him  an  offer  of  all  his  estate^  if  it 
would  please  him,  and  a site  in  the  kingdom  for  the  con- 
struction of  a fortress,  for  thus  would  his  friendship  be 
more  truly  manifested ; and  begged  that  a person  of  great 
confidence  might  be  sent  to  him  to  arrange  this  matter  on 
a proper  footing.  ^ 

Afonso  Dalboquerque  replied  to  them  that  'ho  accepted 
those  offers  of  alliance  made  by  the  Qamorim  in  the  name  of 
the  King  of  Portugal,  his  Lord,  and  on  these  conditions  he 

himself  would  serve  the  Camorim  with  all  his  fleets  and 

• * 

soldiers  that  were  stationed  in  India,  whenever  it  were  re- 
quired, and  that  ke  would  send  without  delay,  in  their  com- 
pany, a servant  of  the  King,  his  Lord,  to  treat  of  that  matter 
of  theirs  that  had  been  proposed.  And  whereas  for  some 
time  Afonso  Dalboquerque  had  bjpen  desirous  of  setting  foot 
in  Calicut  and  constructing  there  a fortress  with  peace  and 
friendship  (seeing  that  ho  never  could  get  the  better  of  the 
^amorim  in  the  war  which  he  had  carried  on  against  him), 
when  three  or  four  days  had  passed  after  Afonso  Dalboquer- 
que had  related  to  the  captains  all  this  business,  and  all  of 
them  had  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  it  would  bo  very 
conducive  to  the  service  ♦f  the  King  of  Portugal  that  a 
fortre^  should  be  constructed  in  Calicut,  he  dispatched  the 
ambassadors  and  shewed  them  every  attention  in  the  name 
of  the  King;  and  in  company  with  them  he  sent  Simfto 
Kangel,  servant  of  the  King,  in  a fu^ta,  with  written  in- 
structions concerning  the  way  he  was  to  proceed. 

As  soon  as  Simao  Rangel  arrived  at  Calicut,  he  went  on 
board  the  caravela  of  Sim^o  Afonso  which  was  riding  at  anobqjr , 
in  the  harboijr,  and  there  he  awaitod  the  answer  of  the  King, 
for  Afonso  Dalboquerque  had  so  commanded  him  to  act/' 
When  the  ambassadors  had  come  before  their  king,  they 
related  to  him  how  Afonso  D’alboquerquo  was  in  Goa  with 
, great  strength  of  soldiery,  and  how  he  was  fortifying  him- 


S3 


coMinirTABivs  or 


self  in  that  city,  and  how  the  Portuguese  had  discomfited  a 
captain  of  the  Hidalc^o,  who  had  come  down  upon  the  lands 
of  Goa;  and  that  Afonso  Dalboquerquo  had  sent  in  their 
company  a servant  of  the  King  of  Portugal  to  ratify  the 
terms  of  peace. 

The  Qamonm,  knowing  that  Simao  Rangel  was  on  board 
the  caravda,  and  was  not  lijcely  to  come  on  shore,  com- 
manded .the  governors  of  the  city  to  commune  with  him, 
and  they  had  many  conversations  relative  to  the  terms  of 
the  peace,  without  being  able  to  arrive  at  any  definite  con- 
clusion; for  the  king  was  willing  only  to^rant  a fortress  in 
Chale,  whereas  Afonso  Dalboquerque  ordered  in  his  written 
instructions  that  ho  was  not  to  accept  any  site  unless  it 
were  in  the  harbour  of  Calfcut  in  front  of  the  king's  own 
landing-stage.*  And  it  turned  out  that,  after  all,  they  came 
to  no  agreement,  for  the  ki^g  would  not  grant  any  site  for 
a fortress  in  his  own  land ; but  only  wanted  to  keep  the 
matter  open  with  dissimulations,  to  the  end  that,  at  this 
same  season,  the  Moorish  merchants  might  dispatch  their 
ships,  which  they  had  laden,  for  the  Straits ; but  this  they 
could  not  do  as  long  as  tho  caravelas  of  the  Portuguese  fleet 
were  lying  there  at  anchor  in  the  harbour. 

. When  SiunXo  Rangel  percoiveii  the  object  of  these  delays, 
and  that  it  was  all  owing  to  the  bad  temper  and"  disshnula- 
tion  of  the  king,  bo  ceased  to  cemmunicate  with  the  gover- 
nors, and  went  on  board  tho  fusta,  and  shaped  hia  oourae  for 
Goa,  where  ho  arrived  and  gave  an  account  to  Afoasd  DaK 
boquerque  of  what  had  taken  place,  and  related  ttxa  dilatory 
way  in  which  the  C^amorim  had  carried  on  the  negotiations 
with  him.  And  he  declared,  too,  that  in  his  own  opinion 
the  king  would  never,  of  Jiis  own  will,  gaant  permission  to 
erect  a fortress  in  any  site  in  hid  land,  for  alY  that  he  might 
offer  them  a site  in  Chale. 

But,  inasmuch  as  Aibnso  Dalboquerque  was  by  this  time 
‘ Or  jetty,  Cerame;  see  vol.  i,  p.  115. 


AFONSO  DAIiBOQUBRQUE. 


83 


ready  with  his  fleet  to  sail  away  and  crniso  off  the  straits 
[of  the  Red  Sea] — which  projected  expedition  ho  afterwards 
abandoned  for  the  voyage  to  Malaca,  as  will  be  related 
farther  on — he  left  this  matter  open  and  in  the  position  it 
now  stood,  until  his  return  from  Malaca,  and  desired 
Manuel  do  Lacerda,  who  was  under  orders,  to  remain  as 
Chief  Captain  of  the  Fleet  on»  that  coast  [of  India]  to  con- 
tinue ever  cruising  off  the  harbour  of  Calicut,  and  to  harass 
it  in  every  possible  way,  and  prevent  any^ships  from  getting 


n/ 


out. 


But  while  Afonso  Dalboquerque  was  away  at  Malaca,  the 
Turks  came  down  to  besiege  Goa,  and  thereby  Manuel  de 
Lacerda  was  compelled  to  quit  the  coast  of  Calicut  and  pro- 
ceed to  the  assistance  of  Goa.  And  at  this  very  time  the 
Moors  had  an  opportunity  of  dispatching  their  ships,  laden 
with  spiceries,  to  the  Straits : and  these,  when  they  were 
so  far  advanced  as  the  Island  of  Qacotorfi,  between  the  Cape 
of  Guardafum  and  Magadoxo,^  encountered  a storm  so  fierce 
that  it  wrecked  two  of  them,  and  the  others  wore  wrecked 
in  that  gulf;  and  Mafamedo  Ma^ari,^  who  was  sailing  in 
that  company  reached  the  Maidive  Islands.^ 

When  the  Moorish  merchants,  who  lived  in  Calicut,  per- 
ceived that  thefr  trade  navigation  was  thus  cut  off,  they 
departed  with  their  wares,  some  to  Cairo,  others  to  Cam- 
baya,  others  to  Ormuz  and  to  other  parts,  in  such  wise  that 
very  few  who  were  not  natives  of  that  place  were  left  re- 
maining in  Calicut,  and  these  used  to  come  from  Qufim,* 

• i 

> On  the  coast  of  Somali,  in  Africa. 

* Mafamede  Ma<jari,  evidently  a corrupted  form  of  the  name 

Muhamined 

* In  the  Indian  Occ^An,  5 deg.  N.  lat.,  73  deg.  30  min.  E.  long.  ^ 

* also  called  by  the  Pdrtugucse  Azafie,  and  by  the  natives 
A8fi,'is  evidently  Safie,  on  the  coast  of  Barbary,  32  deg.  17  min.  N.^ 

9 deg.  8 min.  W.  There  is  a valuahlo  account  of  this  great  city  in  Le 
Gfdtid  JJictionnaire  Gf'oifrnphiqne  of  M.  Bmzen  de  la  Martiniere.  Paris, 
folio,  1768. 


VOL.  in. 


1) 


34 


COMltSKTARIBS  OF 


From  Oarfto^  from  Tremecim,*  and  from  Tripoli/  with  tlieir 
v^areB^  to  Cairo,  and  from  Cairo  they  used  to  make  their 
way  to  Jud4,  and  from  Jad4  to  Calicut,  with  ready  money, 
and  there  they  used  to  build  new  ships,  and  load  them  with 
Bpiceries,  and  so  returned  to  their  own  lands. , 

On  one  occasion,  Afonso  Dalboquerqne  enquired  of  a Moor 
of  these  people  who  ^had  been  taken  in  one  of  their  ships 
which  had  come  from  the  Straits,  how  it  was  that  they 
ventured  to  come  from  so  far  off  to  trade  in  Calicut,  seeing 
that  it  stood  between  two  of  our  fortresses,  and  that  they 
Frere  obliged  to  pass  over  the  very  place  where  our  fleets 
were  stationed.  The  Moor  replied  that  thp  profits  were  so 
great  that  they  would  run  all  risks  to  get  there ; for,  for 
every  cruzado  laid  out  in  Calicut,  they  used  to  make  twelve 
or  thirteen  in  Judd  and  in  all  the  places  that  stood  within 
the  mouth  of  the  Straits;  and  he  stated  it  was  in  conse- 
quence of  this  profit  being  so  great,  and  the  trade  in 
pepper  being  so  extensive,  that  the  Moors  who  were  estab- 
lished in  Calicut  laboured  to  prevent  the  ^araorim  from 
granting  permission  to  the  Portuguese  to  erect  a fortress 
in  his  territory,  for  if  this  were  granted  to  them  the 
merchants  would  be  left  without  any  trade  navigation  to 
the  Straits.  " 

* Oiirao,  now  Oran,  on  tlio  north  coast  of  Africa.  See  toI.  i, 

p.  1^0. 

* 'Fremocim,  also  called  Trcmecem,  Telemicen,  Telmsen,  Tlemeccn, 
or  Tlenicen,  and  anciently  Tiniisi,  a town  fifty  miles  S.  W.  of  Oran,  84 
deg,  52  min.  N.,  1 deg.  18  min.  W.  See  K.  Johnslon’s  Dkliondfry  of 
OdHfrophy ; Ritter’s  Geof/rapkMi-Statisti^ck  Lexicon,  by  A.  Stark,  Leip- 
zig, 186.5 ; and  M,  Bruzon  de  la  MartiniOre’s  work  quoted  above,  where 
there  is  sn  interesting  notice  of  the  site. 

* Tripoli,  on  the  north  coast  of  Africa. 

* Jidda.  See  vol.  i,  p.  234*  • 


AfOHBO  DAtBOQUEBQUE. 


35 


CHAPTER  VIIL 

How  the  King  of  Namoga  sent  bis  ambassadors  to  risit  Afonso 
Dalboquorque  concerning  the  capture  of  Goa ; and  of  the  news 
which  Fr.  Luiz  oommnnicatod  to  him^  and  what  passed  thereafter. 

After  that  the  groat  Afonso  Dalboquerque  sent  Pr.  Luui 
to  Narsinga, — following  the  disaster  of  Calient  (as  I have 
already  related), — he  never  received  any  news  of  how  things 
had  fared  with  him  in  respect  to  the  instructions  which  he 
earned  with  him ; but  when  Goa  had  been  taken  for  the 
second  time,  as^  soon  as  the  news  reached  Narsinga  the 
king  immediately  ordered  his  ambassadors  to  pay  a visit  to 
Afonso  Dalboquerqne,  and  by  means  of  them  Fr,  Lui» 
wrote  to  him,  relating  the  manner  of  his  arrival  at  Nar- 
singa, and  stating  that,  in  other  letters  which  he  had 
written  he  had  described  how  he  had  been  well  received  by 
all  except  the  king ; and,  on  this  occasion,  he  desired  to 
inform  Afonso  Dalboquerque  that  the  King  of  Narsinga 
was  getting  himself  ready  with  five  thousand  men  on  foot 
and  two  thousand  on  horse,  for  an  expedition  against  one  of 
his  vassals  who  had  risen  up  in  rebellion  and  seized  the  city 
of  Pergundd,^  (the  rebel)  declaring  that  to  himself  belonged 
the  kingdom  itself  by  right;  and  that  directly  he  had  taken 
the  rebel  the  king  would  proceed  with  all  this  force  of  men  to 
his  places  situated  on  the  edge  of  the  sea,  and  he  (Fr.  Luiz), 
fpr  his  part,  could  not  understand  the  drift  of  this,  but  as 
Goa  was  so  cldse  by  he  would  advise  Afonso  Dalboquorque 
to  keep  up  friendly  communications  with  the  king,  and  by 
no  means  to  place  any  reliance  upon  the  King  of  Garpopa, 
nor  upon  Timoja,  fiar  they  were  mwn  of  such  bad  dispositions^ 
that  they  had  even  written  to  the  King  of  Narsinga  that, 
if  he  wished  to  regain  possession  of  Goa, — for  it  had 

* Pergundi,  perhaps  Furkundi,  in  the  Bengal  Presidency,  SO  deg.  2ft 
min,  N.,  79  deg.  4 min.  E. 


3« 


C0VVSNTARIE8  Of 


anciently  belonged  to  the  ancestors  of  the  king — be  must 
send  them  both  infantry,  and  cavalry,  and  elephants,  and 
then  they  would  deliver  the  city  over  to  him  before  the 
Portuguese  could  fortify  their  position  therein.  And,  he 
went  on  to  say,  that  he  had  received  trustworthy  news  that 
the  HidalcAo  had  set  forth  with  a large  force  to  attack  the 
city  of  Calbergate,^  the  GuaziJ  of  which  was  an  Abyssinian 
eunuch,  a servant  of  the  King  of  Decam,*  by  name  Meliquo 
Distur,®  and,  as  it  could  not  withstand  the  siege,  after  two 
months  it  had  surrendered  upon  certain  conditions ; and 
there  bad  risen  up  against  the  Hidalcilo  four  of  the  principal 
Guazils  of  the  kingdom  (for  the  Hidalcao  carried  back  with 
him  the  King  of  Decam  a prisoner,  deprived  of  all  his  com- 
mand), who  had  gone  up  against  him  with  a numerous  force 
in  hopes  of  destroying  him ; and  when  these  Guazils  arrived 
at  a certain  watercourse  which  they  could  not  pass  they  let 
themselves  rest  and  there  remained  ; but  the  Hidalcfto,  out 
of  fear  of  them,  had  sent  for  the  soldiers  who  were  on  duty 
in  guarding  the  lands  of  Goa, 

And  Pr.  Luiz  went  on  to  declare  that  there  had  also 
arrived  news  to  the  King  of  Narsinga  that  the  principal 
Hindoos  of  the  city  of  Bilgao*  (as  soon  as  they  had  heard  of 
the  capture  of  Goa  and  fortification  of  it  by  \;he  Portuguese) 
had  broken  out  into  rebellion  against  the  Hidalcao,  and  had 
cast  'the  Moors  out  of  the  city,  and  put  themselves  under 
the  command  of  tho  king  [of  Narsinga],  for  this  city  had 

' Kullmrga^  GolhurgOj  or  Caiberga^  in  the  Nizam’s  ^minions,  Beeigal 
Presidency,  17  deg.  20  min.  N.,  76  deg.  62  min,  E,  The  latter  part  of 
the  name,  according  to  the  Portuguese  rendering,  may  be  intended  to 
signify  Ghaut.  » The  Deccan. 

“ This  is  manifestly  tho  Por^guese  rendering  of  Melek  Distur.  ITie 
first  word  has  been  frequently  explain^  before.  Tha  word  distur  is  of 
Persian  origin,  and  is  nsed  both  in  the  Persian  and  Arabic  languages  to 
signify  uministfr;  hero,  however,  it  appears  rather  as  a proper  name 
than  as  a title. 

' Belgdon^  Belgaum^  or  Belganw^  in  the  Bombay  Presidency,  16  deg. 

60  min.  N.,  74  deg.  81  min,  £.  * 


AFONSO  DAIiDOQTJJCBQUE.  37 

formerly  belonged  to  bim,  but  the  Hidalc&o  bad  taken  it  from 
bim. 

Bilgao  is  a very  large  city,  and  there  is  in  it  a very  largo 
fort,  and  it  is  a pass  and  principal  port  from  the  kingdom 
of  Decam  to  Goa.  There  is  a very  extensive  mountain  range 
which  overlooks  tho  lands  of  Goa,  just  as  the  range  of 
Algarve  [in  Portugal]  looks  over  tho  plain  of  Ourique,  and 
when  this  range  has  been  crossed  tho  kingdom  of  Decam 
lies  all  along  flat  table-land,  liko  the  same  plain.  And  be- 
cause the  principal  reason  why  the  old  ^abayo  had  obtained 
possession  of  Goa  was  that  ho  had  captured  this  fortress 
by  treachery  o^  the  Hindoos  who  used  to  hold  it,  Afonso 
Dalboquerque  used  to  say  very  often,  when  he  found  himself 
annoyed  by  the  recalcitration  of  tho  Hidalcfto,  that  if  the 
king  D.  Manuel  desired  to  keep  the  kingdom  of  Goa  safe, 
ho  ought  by  all  moans  to  try  all  in  his  power  to  take  this 
fortress,  for  by  holding  it  ho  would  secure  all  the  estate  he 
had  there.  And  as  for  the  negotiations  which  his  instruc- 
tions ordered  him  to  carry  out,  ho  had  presented  them  many 
times  without  getting  any  answer  to  tho  purpose,  but  always 
had  been  put  oflf ; but  at  last  he  had  told  him,  that  he  was 
very  much  disconcerted  at  the  orders  for  attacking  him,  and 
he  might  build  a fortress  in  Batacald,  for  ho  said  that  he 
was  very  desirous  of  his  friendship  at  tho  very  time  that 
ho  knew  that  it  had  been  entered  into  with  tho  Hidalcfto, 
but  that  did  not  agree  with  tho  offers  that  he  had  made  to 
help  him  in  taking  the  kingdom  of  Decani,  which  hod  been 
his  of  old,  Jtnd  when  these  interviews  with  the  king  woi‘0 
over,  the  king  sent  for  tho  governor  of  tho  city,  and  blamed 
him  very  much  for  desiring  this  alliance  with  tho  Hidalcfto, 
And  that  King  t»f  Gar<5opa  had  written  him  a letter  by 
virtue  of  which  he  could  take  him  and  destroy  him  if  he 
liked,  but  as  they  were  now  very  friendly,  he  had  not  done 
BO  I but  that  if  this  were  done  for  money,  which  he  had 
promised  to  give  him  every  your,  the  Hidalcfto  would  show 


38 


OOMMCNTABI1SS  Of 


towards  tbom  that  true  faitb  which  his  father  had  shown 
towards  the  King  of  Narsinga  when  he  took  him  in  battle^ 
but  released  him  on  his  promise  to  serve  him  for  ever.  • 

At  the  receipt  of  this  intelligence,  which  Fr^^y  Luiz  wrote  of 
matters  which  had  passed  with  the  King  of  Narsinga,  and 
with  his  governor,  Afonso  Dalboquerque  became  somewhat 
in  suspense  when  he  saw  that* he  was  withdrawing  from  that 
which  he  had  so  often  declared,  namely,  to  help  him  against 
the  Hidalcfto.  But  as  he  know  how  this  came  about,  he 
dissembled  with  him,  and  wrote  to  Fray  Luiz  by  the  same 
ambassador  who  had  brought  him  the  letter,  to  take  his 
leave  of  the  king  with  as  much  dissimulation  as  he  could, 
and  return  immediately ; and  he  put  himself  in  communica- 
tion with  the  Hidalcfto,  declaring  that  he  desired  friendship 
with  him.  For,  in  order  that  the  affairs  of  India  should 
progress  satisfactorily,  as  was  convenient  to  the  King  of 
Portugal,  Afonso  Dalboquerque  always  laboured  to  make 
each  one  of  these  lords  understand  that  he  desired  to  have 
peace  and  friendship  and  the  trade  in  horses  with  him, 
which  was  what  they  claimed ; for,  whereas  ho  held  the  key 

(of  their  position  at  Goa,  ho  desired  by  means  of  this  artifice 
to  sow  dissensions  among  them. 

After  he  had  written  to  the  HidalcAo,  lie  sent  off  to  the 
ambassadors  of  ihe  King  of  Narsinga,  sending  word  by  them 
that  a year  ago  he  had  sent  certain  conditions  to  him  through 
Fray  Luiz,  but  as  he  had  not  yet  received  any  reply  to  them, 
he  could  not  come  to  any  conclusion  with  regard  to  the  qies- 
sages  that  had  been  sent.  The  ambassadora  set  out,  and 
when  they  arrived  at  ^naga,  they  found  Fray  Luiz  was 
dead,  for  a Turk  had  killed  him,  and  it  was  reported  that  the 
HidaloAo  had  ordered  hhf  murder ; and  "thqy  delivered  the 
message  which  they  brought  from  Afonso  Dalbcquerque  to 
the  king,  and  told  him  that  wl^ile  at  Goa  they  had  discovered 
that  ho  was  communicating  with  the  Hidalo&a  So  alarmed 
was  the  King  of  Narsinga  at  hearing  of  this  allianoe,  for  he 


ArONSO  DALBOQUX&QUK. 


knew  that  the  Hidalcfto  had  the  horses  which  was  the  princi^ 
pal  strength  of  his  army^  that  he  immediately  sent  back  the 
two  ambassadors  to  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  with 
very  full  powers  to  conclude  a treaty  of  friendship,  and  to 
arrange  the  terms  of  the  trade  in  horses. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

How  the  great  Afoivio  Dalboquerque  8^  in  order  certain  matters  in  tho 
city,  and  eatabliahod  a Mint  there,  and  of  what  followed. 

The  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  was  so  desirous  that  Goa 
should  return  to  the  state  of  trade  which  it  had  always 
enjoyed  when  under  the  rule  of  the  Qabayo,  that  so  soon  as 
the  fortress  was  on  the  point  of  completion  ho  dispatched 
several  captains  along  the  coast  with  orders  to  compel  all 
the  ships  they  met  with  to  go  into  port  at  Goa,  and  this  he 
did  for  two  reasons.  The  first  was,  that  he  might  benefit 
the  harbour  and  re-people  tho  city  to  its  former  number  of 
population ; and  that  the  caravans  of  Narsinga  and  of  the 
kingdom  of  the  Decam,  with  their  merchandise,  might  come 
to  Goa  in  search  of  horses  as  they  used  of  old  to  come  (for 
the  horses  of  ^his  region  are  much  esteemed  and  fetch  a 
great  price,  because,  apart  from  the  need  of  them  for  mili- 
tary purposes,  the  captains  and  principal  lords  are  in  the 
habit  of  carrying  their  wives  about  on  horses).  The  other 
reason  was,  that  he  might  ruin  tho  harbour  of  Baticali,  > 
which  had  b^ome  very  noble  through  the  horse-tracTe  and 
the  quantity  of  merchandise  which  flowed  into  it  from  Or- 
muz. For  he  considered  that  if  the  horse-trade  were  estab- 
lished in  Goa,  there  would  always  bo  in  tho  city  from  four 
to  five  hundred  horses  belonging  to  the  merchants  which  he 
conid  make  use  of  in  case  of  urgency.  And  in  consequence 
of  the  diligence  which  Afonso  Dalboquerque  set  about  this 
matter,  and  because  he  had  ordered  that  houses  in  the  city 


40 


COHHSNTABlfiS  OT 


should  be  given  to  the  principal  merchants  for  the  better 
arrangement  of  their  merchandise^  merchant  ships  began 
immediately  to  flock  from  many  quarters  to  the  harbour  of 
Goa,  some  coming  from  Ormuz  with  horses,  And  with  a 
view  to  improving  this  state  of  business,  he  gave  orders  for 
the  construction  of  some  groat  stables,  and  organised  a ser- 
vice of  three  hundred  poon^of  the  district,  whoso  duty  it 
was  to  transport  grass,  hay,  and  supplies  for  horses.  And 
with  the  object  of  providing  return  cargoes  for  the  merchants, 
so  that  they  should  not  be  compelled  to  seek  a cargo  in  any 
other  port,  he  commanded  the  Factor  and  officials  to  take 
care  always  to  have  in  the  Factory  pepper,  clqyes,  and  ginger, 
and  all  the  other  kinds  of  merchandise  which  the  merchants 
were  likely  to  require,  and  in  the  clearing  papers  which  they 
ielivered  with  the  cargoes  whenever  the  merchants  desired 
:o  set  sail,  it  was  to  bo  sot  forth  that  the  ships  were  to  be 
jound  for  Ormuz  and  to  no  other  port,  for  it  was  Afonso 
Dalboquerque’s  desire  to  destroy  the  commerce  of  the 
Straits. 

In  consequence  of  the  liberty  which  the  Moors  had  of 
oading  their  ships  with  spices  at  Goa,  all  the  merchants 
cam©  there  to  settle  their  trade.  And  in  one  of  these 
ships  which  brought  horses  Cogeamir^  was  found,  to  whom 
Afonso  Dalboquerque,  on  the  occasion  of  his  taking  Goa  for 
the  first  time,  had  given  two  ships  laden  with  merchandise 
to  make  the  voyage  to  Ormuz.  This  man  was  now  bring- 
ing back  horses  in  exchange  for  his  merchandise,  and 
when  he  arrived  at  India  and  learned  that  the  Moors  of 
Goa  had  risen  up  against  Afonso  Dalboquerque,  and  had 
driven  him  out  of  the  city,  he  had  made  his  way  to  Dabul 
and  gone  to  make  a preseift  of  the  horsefi(*to^the  Hidalofta 
But  when  Afonso  Dalboquerqne  was  informed  that  this 
man  was  arrived,  he  ordered  his  people  to  arrest  him  be- 
cause of  the  treachery  ho  had  been  guilty  of,  and  with  him 
* See  voL  ii,  p.  110. 


AVOKSO  DA130QDISQUS. 


41 


’Was  taken  also  one  of  his  sons,  and  they  were  put  in  chains, 
and  ail  their  goods  seized,  among  them  being  twenty-hvo 
horses,  which  were  forthwith  put  into  the  Factory. 

After  having  arranged  all  these  matters,  Afonso  Dalbo- 
querque  established  a chief  office  wherein  could  be  coined 
money  of  silver,  gold,  and  copper,  of  the  same  standard 
which  had  been  settled  with  the  people  and  the  merchants 
of  the  city  when  Goa  was  captured  for  the  first  time.^  And 
with  this  end  in  view,  he  commanded  that  all  the  Moorish 
money  should  be  brought  to  the  Mint  and  be  stamped  with 
the  dies  of  the  King  of  Portugal,  and  he  gave  to  these  coins 
the  same  names^hat  they  had,  as  has  been  declared  already.® 
This  Mint  was  farmed  out  to  a Chetim*  from  Batical6,  at  the 
rent  of  six  hundred  thousand  reis;^  and  Alvaro  Godinho, 
a married  householder  of  Goa,  was  appointed  Treasurer  of 
the  Mint,  and  all  the  other  offices  were  filled  up  with  chief 
men  who  were  married,  with  a view  to  encouraging  the 
people  to  many  and  people  the  land.®  For,  already  at  this 
time  there  were  in  Goa  about  four  hundred  and  fifty  mar- 
ried men,  all  servants  of  the  King,  and  of  the  Queen,  and 
of  the  Lords  of  Portugal : and  those  who  desired  to  marry 
were  so  numerous,  that  Afonso  Dalboquerque  could  hardly 
grant  their  requests,  for  be  did  not  give  permission  except 
for  the  men  of  proved  character  to  marry.  But  in  order 
to  favour  this  work,  as  it  was  entirely  of  his  own  idea, 
and  also  because  they  were  men  of  good  character,  and 
had^  deserved  by  their  good  services  that  this  privilege 
should  be  granted  to  them,  he  extended  the  permission  to 
marry  far  beyond  the  powers  which  had  been  assigned  by 
the  king  D.  Manuel,  for  the  women  with  whom  they  mai*- 
ried  were  the  d|iughters  of  the  prihcipal  men  of  the  land.  • 

And  he  granted  this  favour,  among  other  reasons,  in 

1 See  vol.  il,  p.  128.  • * See  vol  ii,  pp.  129, 180. 

• See  vol.  U,  p.  130,  note  2.  ‘ About  £126. 

* See  vol  ii,  p.  99. 


4a 


COMMENTARIES  Of 


oi^er  that  when  the  Hindoos  observed  what  he  did  for 
their  daughters,  and  nieces,  and  sisters,  they  might  with 
better  willingness  turn  Christians ; and  for  this  reason  he 
would  not  suffer  any  of  the  women  to  be^  enslaved,  but 
ordered  that  they  should  all  be  taken  away  from  the  masters 
who  had  possession  of  them ; and  he  divided  among  all  the 
married  ones^  the  lands,  houses,  and  cattle,  and  everj'thing 
else  that  there  was,  to  give  them  a start  in  life ; and  if  the 
women  whom  he  thus  gave  in  marriage  asked  for  the  houses 
which  had  been  in  possession  of  their  fathers  or  their  hus- 
bands, he  ordered  that  these  should  be  so  given,  and  therein 
they  found  many  jewels  and  gold-pieces  ^liich  had  been 
hidden  underground  and  abandoned  when  the  city  was  cap- 
tured. And  as  for  the  landed  property  which,  according  to 
information  he  obtained,  had  been  in  possession  of  the 
Moorish  mosques  and  tho  Hindoo  pagodas,  he  gave  them 
all  to  the  principal  church  of  the  city,  which  he  dedicated 
to  the  protection  of  Sancta  Oathenna,  on  whose  feast-day 
Our  Lord  had  given  him  the  victory  over  that  city.^  But 
in  this  matter  of  giving  permission  for  marriages,  Afonso 
Dalboquerque  experienced  much  opposition,  for  there  were 
many  who  disapproved  of  his  thus  maintaining  Goa,  The 
chief  opponents  in  this  were  Lourenqo  Moreno,  the  Factor 
of  Cochim,  and  Antonio  Beal,  Chief  Alcaide,  and  Caspar 
Pereira,  and  Diogo  Pereira,  who,  not  content  with  meeting 
together  and  taking  counsel  upon  this  business,  even  wont 
so  far  as  to  write  to  the  king  D.  Manuel,  setting  forth  their 
arguments  how  that  the  king  ought  to  give  orders  for  its 
prevention.  And  the  principal  reason  they  gave,  was  that 
it  created  many  expenses,  for  they  thought  that  if  it  were 
shown  to  entail  loss  of  Itate  property  the^king  would  be 
stirred  to  more  rapid  action  jin  this  matter. 

And  Afonso  Dalboquerque  appointed  as  captain  of  the 
fortress  Bodrigo  Babelo,  who  was  a very  brave  cavalier ; 

^ See  vol.  i.  Introduction,  p.  I , 


AFONSO  DALBOQUBRQUE, 


43 


and  Francisco  Pantoja,  chief  Alcaide ; and  Francisco  Cor- 
vine!, a Florentine  by  birth,  factor.  Tlie  scriveners  of  tho 
Factory  were  Jofto  Teixeira,  son  of  Jofto  Paijanha  of  Alen- 
quer  (who  aoc^jmpanied  Afonso  Dalboquerque  in  the  first 
capture  of  Goa),  and  Vicente  da  Costa  (son  of  Master  Afonso 
who  had  been  chief  physician  to  king  D.  Manuel),  married 
in  Goa.  And  he  laid  down  rules  for  the  inhabitants  of  the 
city,  with  regard  to  the  appointment  of  judges,  municipal 
oflScers,^  and  superintendent  of  weights  and  measures,* 
every  year. 

And  when  all  these  things  have  been  thus  ordained  (as 
well  as  others  \%hich  I omit,  to  avoid  seeming  unnecessarily 
long),  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  began  to  make  his 
fleet  ready,  with  the  intention  of  not  passing  the  winter  in 
Goa,  because  of  the  dearth  of  supplies  therein,  and  because 
there  was  not  enough  motiey  to  pay  his  men.  And  he 
determined  to  set  forth  in  that  direction  where  he  could  bo 
of  most  service  to  the  king.  And  he  left  .four  hundred 
soldiers  to  guard  the  fortress  of  Goa,  and  a great  quantity 
of  artillery,  both  largo  and  small,  gunpowder,  saltpetre,  and 
sulphur,  and  a machine  in  working-order  for  making  as 
much  as  might  be  required,  and  eighty  mounted  men, 
married  and  settled  in  Goa.  Duarte  de  Mollo  was  appointed 
chief  captain  of  the  sea,  with  four  ships  and  three  galleys, 
under  orders  to  cruise  along  tho  coast  and  provide  tho  city 
with  whatever  was  required  ; and  when  Manuel  do  Lacerda 
shopld  arrive,  whom  Afonso  Dalboquerque  would  leave  to 
bo  chief  captain  of  a fleet  in  Cochim,  with  all  his  powers, 
thou  Duarte  do  Mello  was  to  obey  him  as  if  he  were  Dalbo- 
querque himself.  And  for  payment  of  all  these  people  and 
fleets,  he  assigned  tho  twelve  “thousand  cruzados  which 
Merlao  had  undertaken  to  pay  for  the  rent  of  the  island. 

» Vereadores, 

* Aintotaceis:  there  U an  older  form,  almofobelf  al^tnoklasib^  Arab. 


44 


C0HHSKTAB1E8  OF 


CHAPTER  X. 

Of  the  proceedings  of  the  Bcndar^,  Governor  of  Malftca,  when  he  heard 
that  Goa  bad  been  taken,  and  of  the  nows  which  Ruy  de  Araujo, 
who  was  in  captivity  there,  wrote  to  the  great  Afonso  Dalbo* 
querque. 

Inasmuch  as  Goa  was  very  much  renowned  in  all  the 
parts  and  kingdoms  of  India^  the  news  soon  spread  through 
the  merchants  of  Calicut,  informing  all  the  kings  how  the 
great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  had  taken  the  city  and  driven 
the  Turks  out  of  it.  When  this  news  reached  Malaca,  the 
Bendara  who  governed  the  kingdom  for  the  king  his  nephew, 
fearing  lest  Afonso  Dalboquerque  should  determine  to  come 
to  Malaca  and  exact  vengeance  for  the  treason  and  spolia- 
tion which  had  been  practised  upon  the  Portuguese/ — with 
his  accustomed  dissimulation  and  subtlety,— lost  no  time  in 
providing  his  city  with  quantities  of  supplies,  and  went  to 
Buy  de  Araujo  and  the  other  captives  who  had  been  put 
into  a house  and  very  badly  treated,  and  told  them,  without 
saying  anything  about  the  current  state  of  affairs  in  India, 
that  the  tumult  which  had  arisen  against  the  Portuguese 
Lad  not  been  brought  about  by  his  design  Aor  by  his  orders, 
but  that  the  Guzerates  and  Jaos  had  planned  it  without 
Lis  knowledge,  because  they  were  afraid  that  the  Portu- 
guese would  treat  them  badly  whenever  they  went  out  of 
their  port,  and  he  further  declared  that  it  was  his  intention 
to  punish  these  people  severely,  because  He  desired  Wry 
much  to  be  on  friendly  terms  with  the  Portuguese^  and  to 
see  them  carrying  on  a trade  with  Malaca. 

^ When  this  interview  was  at  an  end,  4he  Bendara  gave 
orders  to  take  the  prisoners  inlo  a house  outside  the  city, 
tvhich  was  not  so  dismal  ks  the  one  they  had  ocQupied. 
When  Ninachatu,  a Hindoo  resident  of  Malaca,  who  bad 
^ See  vol.  ii,  pp.  78,  74* 


AFONSO  DALBOQtTERQUE, 


43 


freqaently  performed  many  good  serviooa  to  oar  pooplo 
during  their  captivity,  heard  this  news  of  the  taking  of  Goa, 
he  made  his  way  to  the  Bendari,  and  told  him  that  if  Goa 
had  been  taken  by  the  Portuguese^as  the  report  wont — he 
was  afraid  that  Ihe  Governor  of  India  would  desire  to  como 
to  the  land  [of  Malaca]  to  take  vengeance  for  what  had 
been  done  therein  to  the  Captain  of- the  King  of  Portugal ; 
and  therefore  it  was  his  opinion  that  it  would  "bo  advisable 
to  order  the  liberation  of  Ruy  de  Araujo  aijd  his  companions, 
and  to  treat  them  very  kindly,  for  it  might  even  bo  that  a 
time  might  come  when  they  would  be  glad  to  uso  those  men 
for  mediation.  This  advice,  which  Ninachatu  gave,  pleased 
the  Bendard,  and  he  gave  orders  for  the  release  of  the 
Portuguese,  and  gave  them  a house  wherein  they  might 
live,  and  ten  thousand  calaina^  worth  of  Cambayan  stuffs,  of 
that  which  had  been  taken  from  the  fleet  of  Diogo  Lopez  de 
Sequeira,*  to  trade  with,  and  support  themselves  from  their 
profits,  for  this  was  the  custom  of  the  king  with  his  slaves ; 
and  it  was  signified  to  them~tbat  this  property  was  assigned 
to  them  for  their  support,  but  when  the  Portuguese  ships , 
should  arrive,  then  their  accounts  should  be  settled,  and  all 
the  loss  that  they  had  sustained  there  should  bo  made  good. 
This  time-serving^  policy,  which  the  Bendard  used  in  his 
dealings  with  Ruy  de  Araujo  and  his  companions,  was  not  only 
the  result  of  the  entreaties  of  Ninachatu,  but  also  because 
there  was  a junk  ready  to  set  sail  for  India,  and  he  wanted 
the  news  to  be  taken  there  by  it  how  well  he  was  treating 
the  l^ortuguese^whom  he  had  captured ; and  so  said  some 
Moors,  who  were  his  friends,  to  Ruy  de  Araujo.  But  they 
said  also  that  as  soon  as  the  junk  had  set  sail,  all  that  the 
Bendard  had  granted  to  them  wo»)d  bo  taken  away  again,^ 
and  they  would*  be  again  cast  into  prison,  and  even  if  the  ‘ 
Bendard  did  not  do  so  it  would  bo  solely  out  of  fear 

* Catains,  Tho  word  Calaim  signifies  a very  fine  kind  of  Indian  copper. 

* See  voL  ii,  pafee  74.  • 


46  COJfilBNTARIES  OF 

of  what  he  had  heard  of  the  progress  of  Afonso  Dalbo- 
qnerque. 

When  Ruy  de  Araujo  came  to  know  this,  he  determined 
to  send  word  to  Afonso  Dalboqnerque  of  all  that  had  taken 
place  in  Malaca/and  arranged  his  plans  with  a Moor  who 
was  named  Abedalla,'  and  through  him  he  wrote  that  he 
would  have  Afonso  Dalboqae^*qae  to  know  there  were  nine- 
teen Portuguese  alive,  and  the  Bendara  had  tried  many 
times  to  force  them  to  turn  Moors,  and  did  many  cruel 
things  to  them  on  this  account,  and  behaved  very  cruelly 
to  them  on  this  account.  But  the  Bendard  was  in  a great 
dread,  lest  ho  (Afonso  Dalboquerque)  should  make  his  way 
to  Malaca,  for  he  was  not  liked  by  any  of  the  kings  whoso 
territory  was  contiguous  to  his  own,  and  all  were  obliged  to 
oppose  him  because  he  was  a great  tyrant  and  practised 
constant  robberies  upon  the  merchants  who  had  any  inter- 
course with  that  port.  And  if  he  (Afonso  Balboquerquo) 
should  make  up  his  mind  to  go  to  Malaca,  then  it  ought 
only  to  be  with  the  greatest  fleet  possible,  to  the  end  that 
^the  sea  and  land  both  should  obey  him  when  they  beheld 
the  great  power  of  the  King  of  Portugal  in  those  regions; 
and  if  any  junk  should  be  captured  in  their  passage  for 
Malaca,  no  cruelty  ought  to  be  done  to  the  people  taken  in 
them,  only  they  should  be  kept  captive,  and  on  arriving  at 
the  port  he  ought  to  send  some  of  them  on  land  with  orders 
to  convey  to  the  Bendaii  the  message  that  ho  (Afonso  Dal- 
boquerque} was  not  minded  to  make  war  upon  Malaca  nor 
to  take  any  of  her  possessions,  provided  Hhat  the  fiing 
would  make  a treaty  of  peace  and  friendship  with  him,  and 
deliver  up  tho  Christians,  and  put  himself  under  the  orders 
of  the  King  of  Portugal^  for  the  Bendaii  bad  determined, 
directly  he  should  be  informed  of  the  arrival  of  our  fleet  on 
the  coast,  to  send  all  the  captains  off  immediately  four 
leagues^  distance  up  into  the  interior  country,  until  terms 
i Cf.  AbetUld,  vol.  i,  p.  121. 


AFOirSO  DAZiBdQTHlRaTJlC*  . 

eonld^be  arranged^  for  he  was  afttttd  that  if  they  remained 
CD  the  spot  they  vroold  giro  Afonso  Dalboqnerqne  intelU* 
genoe  oi  many  events.  Bat  as  for  past  events,  after  that  day 
of  his  misfortanes^  and  of  the  departure  oi  Diogo  Lopea  de 
Seqneira  fix>in  tliat  port,  he  would  not  write  too  minutely, 
for  all  was  overwhelmed  by  the  bad  treatment  they  had 
received  from  the  Bendari  ip  their  captivity  np  to  the 
present  day.  It  was  true,  indeed,  that  the  Bendara  had 
thought  good  to  give  them  a home  in  vyhich  they  were  all 
living,  and  ten  thousand  ealains^  worth  of  merchandise, 
whereof  they  were  to  support  themselves  by  the  profits, 
declaring  that  he  was  ready,  on  his  part,  to  make  good  to 
them  all  the  loss  they  had  received  when  Afonso  Dalboqner- 
qne,  on  his  part,  should  reimburse  him  for  the  loss,  on  the 
other  hand,  which  he  had  experienced  from  tho  attacks 
made  by  Portuguese  ships  on  his  jnnks ; and  declaring,  too, 
that  he  had  punished  the  Guzerates  and  Jaos  who  had4>een 
guilty  of  treason,  in  such  a manner  that  henceforth  they 
would  never  again  dare  to  do  so,  for  (said  the  Bendard),  he 
was  very  desirous  of  the  friendship  of  the  King  of  Portugal, 
and  wished  to  become  his  vassal.  And  (Ruy  do  Araujo 
continued)  as  for  these  things  and  many  more  of  which  he 
did  not  write,  aS  he  did  not  take  any  notice  of  them,  the 
Bendard  every  day  made  a thousand  excuses ; but  he  him- 
self, and  all  his  fellow  captains  with  liim,  begged  him 
(Afonso  Dalboquerque),  for  the  love  of  God,  to  keep  them 
in  remembrance,  and  rescue  them  out  of  this  captivity,  and 
to  cause  to  be*  given  to  the  Moor,  tho  bearer  of  the  letter, 
twenty  cruzados  out  of  his  effects,  for  he  had  lent  it  to  the 
captives  to  buy  food,  and  to  show  him  kindness ; for,  besides 
his  always  helping  them  and  aceompanying  them,  he  had 
consented,  witt  very  little  persuasion,  to  undertake  the 
journey,  seeing  that  he  ran  a very  great  risk  of  hU  life  if 
he  had  been  discovered,  but  ho  trusted  in  the  kinduesa 
* Si>c  p.  45. 


C01IIM1!KTAUIKS  Of 


M 

^bioh  Afonso  Dalboqnerque  would  shew  him  for  it;  and 
that  Ninachatg  took  the  opportunity  to  beg  him,  of  his  greah 
kinji^s,  that  he  would  not  let  the  Moors  of  Coohim  know 
what  he  had  done  for  the  captives  in  Malaca,  for  ho  feared 
lest  they  should  write  to  the  Bendar^  and  do  him  an  injury 
for  it ; for  it  was  Ninachatu  who  had  given  the  captives  an 
opportunity  of  writing,  and  pf  despatching  the  Moor  with 
the  letter;  ‘but  if  it  were  so  disposed  that  his  Lordship^ 
Afonso  Dalboquerque,  could  not  possibly  get  to  Malaca  by 
any  reasonable  manner,  then  that  he  would  send  them  word 
of  it  as  secretly  as  he  could,  before  the  Moors  could  got  in- 
telligence of  the  impossibility  of  his  going,  for  he  trusted 
that  Our  Lord  would  grant  them  a means  of  going  from 
that  to  some  other  place  safe  and  free  to  make  their  way 
back,  again  to  India. 


CHAPTER  XL 

How  the  Captains  of  the  Fleet  of  Diogo  Mendez  requested  him  to 
set  out  for  Malaca ; aud  of  what  passed  with  them,  and  how  he 
begged  Afonso  Dalboquerque  to  jgrant  him  permission  to  go ; and 
of  the  reasons  wherefore  it  was  not  granted.  ^ 

The  captains  of  the  fleet  of  Diogo  Mendes,  seeing  that 
the  fortress  of  Goa  was  quite  finished,  and  the  afiairs  of  the 
city  continuing  to  become  more  and  more  in  order,  and 
being  desirous  of  performing  their  voyage,  went  to  him  and 
declared  to  him  that  their  ships  were  thos^  of  merchants 
who  had  struck  a contract  with  the  king  D.  Manuel,  to  go 
to  Malaca,  and  take  in  a cargo,  and  that  up  to  that  present 
time  there  had  always  boen  some  exouse  for  the  delay  of 
their  setting  sail  because  tbe  monsoon  had  not  yet  come ; 
but  now  that  they  were  havftig  this  wind,  and  the  business 
of  Goa  was  finished,  in  whick,  indeed,  all  had  served  thO' 
king  very  well,  they  ought  to  proceed. 


AV0K60  PALBOQ0BBQUS. 


49 


V Diogo  Ifendes  replied  to  them  that  he  liked  their  advice 
veiy  much,  but  it  was  necessary  to  give  an  account  of  the 
proposed  starting  to  Afonso  Balboquerque,  not  only  as  a 
compliment^  bat  in  order  that  the  opportunity  might  be 
taken  to  get  him  to  supply  the  ships  with  some  things  which 
i^ere  necessary  for  that  voyage,  and  they  had  given  their 
fealty  to  him,  and  could  not  sail  out  of  that  port  with  his 
licence.'  Dinis  Cemiche,  like  a foreigner,  and  One  who  had 
more  regard  for  his  profit  than  for  his  honour,  replied  that 
those  compliments  might  be  dispensed  with,  for  in  the 
contract  which  the  merchants  made  with  the  king  he  had 
therein  given  them  exemption  from  the  jurisdiction  of  Afonso 
Dalboquerque  and  all  other  governors  of  India.  But  in- 
asmuch as  Diogo  Mendez  was  an  experienced  man,  although 
in  this  matter  he  erred  in  what  be  did  by  advice  of  the 
captains,  masters,  and  pilots  of  its  fieet,  dismissing  from 
his  mind  the  arguments  advanced  by  Dinis  Cemiche,  he  went 
to  Afonso  Dalboquerque  and  told  him  that  while  they  were 
in  Cananor  he,  Afonso  Dalboquerque,  had  said  that  on  the 
completion  of  the  Goa  undertaking,  and  on  arrival  of  the 
time  of  the  monsoon,  permission  should  be  accorded  for  his 
departure  to  Malaca,  and  he  would  give  him  everything 
that  he  required  for  his  voyage ; and  that  as  Our  Lord  had 
given  him  the  city  thus  gained  with  so  much  honours  for 
himself,  and  he,  Diogo  Mendez,  was  no  longer  required 
there,  therefore  he  begged  him  very  much  of  his  kindness 
to  dispatch  him,  and  give  him  licence  to  set  forth,  for  when 
he  looked  int<f  the  conditions  whereby  the  merchants  had 
contracted  with  the  king,  he  found  he  could  not  put  any 
hindrance  in  the  way  of  their  performing  their  voyage,  but 
on  the  other  hand  bis  captains  woald  murder  him  if  he  did 
go ) and  tfiey  made  every  day  formal  requisitions  to 
Siih  that  they  might  sot  out,  but  he  did  not  wish  to  do  so 
^thout  Afonso  Dalboquerque's  consent. 

\ See  vol.  ii,  pp.  252,  2.58. 


^ ot 

Afotfido  Bfldboqnerque  replied  that  it  wm  true  Jto  had 
promised  at  Cana^^  dispatch  him  dtrectly^the  busmen 
of  Goa  was  completed  j but  when  he  had  made  that  promise 
he  was  not  awaro  of  the  condition  in  which  the  affairs  of 
Halaoa  were»  and  that  it  was  but  a few  days  since  he  had 
received  a letter  from  Ruy  de  Araujo,  giving  him  an  aoconnt 
of  the  state  of  that  country^  and  declaring  that  in  case  he 
had  to  navigate  to  those  parts  it  must  be  with  so  powerful 
a fleet  that  everything  should  yield  to  it ; and  when  he  con- 
sidered this,  and  saw  in  how  difficult  a position  the  affairs 
of  Malaoa  were  placed/  he  must  beg  him  of  his  kindness 
not  to  be  desirious  of  risking  his  "^essels^and  the  people 
ho  hod  brought  with  him,  for  should  any  disaster  happen  to 
them  both  would  have  to  bear  the  blame,  since  it  was  plain, 
from  what  had  happened  to  Diogo  Lopez  de  Sequeira/  that 
they  could  not  open  up  any  commerce  with  Malaca  except 
by  exchange  of  lance-th rusts/"'  and  this  could  not  be  effected 
by  four  rotten  ships  and  two  rusty  swords.  And  there  were 
two  reasons  why  he  could  not  help  him  with  his  soldiers  and 
^ his  fleet : — the  first,  because  aftairs  at  Goa  were,  as  he  could 
see  for  himself,  in  so  delicate  a condition ; the  second,  that 
there  was  news  of  the  coming  of  the  Rumes,  which  had  set 
the  whole  of  India  in  an  uproar ; but  when  these  disturb- 
ances were  over  he  promised  he  would  help  him,  as  he  had 
already  promised.  After  many  conversations  with  Afonso 
Dalboquerque,  who  was  determined  not  to  grant  him  per- 
mission to  go,  Diogo  Mendez  took  leave  of  him  discon- 
tented, and  when  he  arrived  at  his  ship  thd*  captains  came 
on  hoax'd  to  hear  what  had  taken  place,  except  Baltezar  da 
Silva,  who  remained  behind  ill  at  Cananor.  Diogo  Mendez 
gave  them  an  account  what  had  been  said  by  Afbpsd 

» 0$  negodos  efe  Malaca  ettajym  de  md  desistdo,  The^lStter 
equivalent  to  digeetdo,  and  the  phrase  sonifies  “ o£  a hard/indigesk^^ 
uatracUble  character”.  ’ f See  vol.  ii,  pp.  81,  78, 

• A troGo  de  lan^adas.  There  is  her©  a play  on  the  word  (roco; 
also  signifies  “ exchange”  in  a commercial  sense.' 


51 


4f01l60  04ItBdQUIRQtTB. 

i}AllK>jq9erq[tie,  ao  with  this  Toplj  all  came  to  the  detetr 
mmatio^  of  settihg^ont  withoat  making  any  farther  demand 
for  permission  to  do  so. 


CHAPME  XII. 

How  Diogo  Mendoz,  by  the  advice  of  hia  captains,  hoisted  sail  to  pass 
over  the  bar,  and  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  sent  after  him, 
and  they  made  him  turn  back,  and  the  rest  which  took  place. 

Now  inasmuch  as  the  captains  were  ill  pleased  because 
the  great  Aforf|0  Dalboquerque  had  denied  them  the  per* 
mission  to  depart  which  Diogo  Mendez  had  begged  of  him, 
and  as  they  held  firm  to  their  opinion  that  he  could  neither 
demand  their  submission  to  his  orders  nor  could  they  profess 
it  to  him,  because  they  had  come  out  under  exemption  from 
the  orders  of  the  Governor  of  India,  they  therefore  de- 
termined to  sot  their  sails  and  shape  tlieir  course  in  a 
straight  line  for  Malaca.  And  because  they  had  some  mis- 
^ving  about  sailing  out  over  the  bar  at  night,  Manuel  Pirez, 
who  held  the  office  of^pilot  and  captain  of  Baltozar  da  Silva’s 
ship,  declared  that  he  could  lead  all  the  vessels  out  over  the 
bar,  even  if  it  were  at  midnight,  and  could  take  them  to 
and  return  to  Portugal  without  touching  at  India 
at  all»on  the  return  journey. 

At  this  declaration  made  by  Manuel  Pirez,  immediately 
on%i6  fall  of  night  all  set  their  sails  except  Pero  Coresma, " 
who  was  nofSn  this  plot  and  kept  quietly  aloof.  Now 
Manuel  Pirez,  whose  vessel  could  sail  very  well  on  a boWf 
line,  found  no  difficulty  in  sailing  at  once  right  over  the  bar, 
•but  the  others  kqpt  on  tacking  until  the  morning  broke. 
As  soon  ai^Afcibso  Dalboquerque  was  informed  that  Diogo 
^endez  hi^  gone  off,  he  immediately  sent  after  him  Duarte 
lia  Silva  end  James  Teixeira  in*  two  galleys,  and  Manuel  de 
liaperda  along  the  shore  with  a party  of  mounted  men,  to 


52 


OOMMKKTARIKS  Of 


make  their  way  to  the  bar  and  take  up  and  get  into  any 
boats  that  might  be  there,  and  force  hith  to  stop ; and  he 
gave  instructions  both  to  one  party  and  the  other;  that 
in  case  the  fugitives  would  not  give  heed  to  this,  their  com- 
mand, then  they  were  to  sink  them  all.  • 

On  coming  up  with  Diogo  Mendez,  James  Teixeira  re- 
quired him,  o^j  behalf  of  Afoiiso  Dalboquerque,  to  return, 
but  the  former,  who  was  still  fully  resolved  to  go,  would 
not  yield  when  called  upon  to  do  so.  So  when  James 
Teixeira  perceived  that  he  would  not  pay  any  attention  to 
the  commands  of  Afonso  Dalboquerque,  he  called  out  to 
Martim  Afonso,  who  was  the  pilot  of  the  fijgitive  vessel,  to 
give  orders  for  taking  in  tlr'ir  sails,  but  he  replied  that  only 
if  Diogo  Mendez,  who  was  properly  his  chief  captain,  should 
order  him  to  do  so  would  he  do  it.  So  perceiving  that 
neither  by  fair  nor  by  foul  means  could  he  prevail  upon 
Diogo  Mendez  to  return,  he  aimed  a shot  at  him,  high  up 
over  the  rigging,  and  then  ordered  another  shot  to  be  fired ; 
but  at  this  juncture  there  aririved  Duarte  da  Silva  in  the 
other  galley,  and  fired  a shot  at  the  fugitive  ship  and  struck 
her  on  the  halliards,  and  down  fell  the^ain  yard  all  at  once. 

When  Diogo  Mendez  perceived  that  his  mainsail  was 
disabled,  he  signalled  to  the  others  to  take  in  their  sails, 
and  he  let  go  his  anchor.  ♦As  soon  as  Manuel  Pirez  saw 
that  the  flagship  of  this  fleet  had  struck  her  sails,  hd  came 
up  alongside  of  her  and  asked  Diogo  Mendez  for  fur^er 
instructions ; and  he  replied  that  all  he  could  do  wS  to 
shorten  sail,  and  then  they  must  all  go  back  and  pay  the 
penalty  for  what  they  had  done,  in  accordance  with  the 
advice  given  by  him  and  the  other  captains.  And  while  the 
matter  was  in  this  stat^  Pero^  DalpoetHi.  Auditor  of  India, ^ 
came  up  in  a pardo,  and  when  Manuel  de  Laceifda  saw  him 
he  proceeded  to  unite  with  him,  and  they  took  Diogo  Mendez 
and  all  the  other  captains,  pilots,  and  masters,  and  carried 
them  back  as  prisoners  to  the  city. 


mK0O  DALBOQ0BBQUI!. 


53 


Afonso  Dalboqoerquo,  who  had  already  received  intelli- 
gence of  the  progress  of  the  afl^ir  by  a messenger,  whom 
Manuel  de  Lacerda  had  despatched  by  land,  caused  Diogo 
Mendez  to  be  brought  into  his  presence,  and  told  him  that 
he  was  exceedingly  astonished  to  think  that  he  should  thus 
break  the  word  of  honour  which  bo  had  given,  and  disobey 
his  captain-general  before  al)  the  ambassadors  of  the  kings 
and  lords  of  India,  who  were  in  that  place,  the  advice  of 
four  lunatics^  in  his  fleet,  when  it  had  boen  already  decided 
that  it  was  not  advantageous  to  the  service  of  the  king 
that  he  should  be  permitted  to  go  to  Malaca.  And  Diogo 
Mendez  replied  that  he  had  done  this,  not  with  the  inten- 
tion of  acting  '^disobediently  towards  him,  but  because  his 
honour  had  compelled  him  to  do  as  ho  had  done,  for  he> 
being  a man  accustomed  to  very  great  deeds,  had  been 
sent  out,  like  an  ordinary  esquire,  with  two  boats  to  rein- 
force the  Island  of  Chorao,®  upon  which  the  Turks  had  made 
a descent. 

Afonso  Dalboquerque  told  him  that  that  was  not  a valid 
excuse,  for  no  honourable  man  who  was  a cavalier  like  him- 
splf  would  think  of  feeling  dishonoured  at  being  ordered  to 
flght  for  the  service  of  his  king,  and  he  reminded  him  that 
he  had  despatcl^ed  on  that  same  expedition  to  Chorfto  Manuel 
de  Lacerda,  the  chief  captain  of  the  king^s  fleet,  with  other 
boats,  and  he  had  not  thought  it  any  affront  to  be  engaged 
in  it.  And,  he  continued,  this  aflair  was  very  serious,  and 
of^buch  a character  that  he  should  not  be  peiforming  his 
duty  if  he  faited  to  visit  it  with  its  just  punishment,  which 
he  for  his  part  intended  to  carry  out  to  the  full ; and  there 
and  then  he  sent  him  under  arrest  to  the  keep  of  the  castle.® 
And  as  for  the  other  captainS;^.  pilots,  and  masters,  he 

1 Sandeoil 

* One  of  the  many  ulandB  that  lie  near  tliat  of  Goa,  and  make  up  the 
Goa  territory. 

* A Ujrre  de  mnagem.  Sec  vol.  i,  p.  45. 


64 


COMMENTARIES  OF 


ordered  them  to  be  put  into  chains,  and  in  solitary  confine- 
ment, and  gave  orders  to  Pero  Dalpoem'to  draw  up,  as 
briefly  and  quickly  as  he  might,  a formal  account  of  this 
affair,  for  there  were  in  Goa  at  that  time  ambassadors  of  the 
king  of  Narsinga  and  of  other  kings  of  India,  who  had  wit- 
nessed the  disobedience  which  had  been  shown  to  Afonso 
Dalboquerqiie^  and  he  did  not  wish  that  they  should  depart 
without  first  of  all  observing  the  punishment  which  he  should 
visit  upon  them  in  consequence. 

And  when  the  final  inquiry  had  been  made,  and  all  was 
drawn  up,  Afonso  Dalboquerquo  commanded  that  all  the 
captains  should  be  summoned  > and,  having  ^taken  notice  of 
the  charges  brought  against  them  by  the  Auditor,  it  w |,s 
adjudged  that  Diogo  Mendez  be  sent  back  in  disgrace  tg 
Portugal,  to  appear  and  answer  to  the  acts  of  accusation  for 
his  misdeeds  in  person  before  the  king  D.  Manuel,  and 
Pero  Coresma  was  also  to  be  sent  back  in  disgrace  to 
Portugal,  although  he  was  not  in  the  plot,  because  he  did 
not  divulge  the  intended  flight  of  Diogo  Mendez^  and  Dinis 
Cemiche  was  condemned  to  be  put  to  death  by  decapita- 
tion, and  Martim  Afonso,  chief  pilot,  and  Manuel  Pirez,  pilot 
and  captain  of  the  ship  of  Baltezar  da  Silva,  and  Dioga 
Fernandez,  master  of  Dinis  Cemiche^s  shipj  all  three  to  be 
imprisoned  in  their  ships,  of  which  they  were  but  lately 
masters  and  pilots ; . and  these  sentences  upon  them  were 
carried  out  forthwith  that  very  day ; and  when  Afonso  Dal- 
boquerque  ordered  the  execution  of  Dinis  Cerniche  to 
carried  out,  the  ambassadors  of  the  King  of  l^arsinga  came 
and  begged  him  to  forgive  him,  which  he  did,  commuting 
this  punishment  into  transportation  to  Portugal  in  disgrace, 
there  to  answer  in  person  4he  formal  chafes  of  misdeeds 
brought  against  him.  * 


JtlOXSO  iJUBOaiT®^  55 


CHAPTER  XIIL 

How  th«  great  Alonao  Dalboqueiniue  »ct  sail  for  the  Straite  of  M6ca 
with  his  fleet,  and  finding  he  could  not  cross  the  shoals  of  Padua, 
stood  off  Goa  and  made  his  way  direct  to  Malaca. 

Although  the  king  D.  Mannel  had  very  ofteu  written  to 
great  Afonso  Dalboquer(|ue  to  go  up  the.  Straits  of  the 
Red  Sea  and  erect  a fortress  in  Adem,  the  affairs  of  Goa 
occupied  so  much  of  his  time  and  thoughts  that  ha  never 
yet  had  any  opportunity  before  now  of  taking  this  enter- 
prise in  hand.  And  although  the  letter  which  Riiy  de 
Araujo  wrote  cbncerning  the  state  of  affairs  at  Malaca  had 
greatly  embarrassed  him  in  his  proceedings  (as  has  already 
been  related),  nevertheless,  trusting  to  the  mercy  of  God, 
he  made  up  hia  mind  to  proceed  to  the  Straits  and  ac- 
complish the  desires  of  the  king  D.  Manuel ; and  having  his 
fleet  ready  with  men,  supplies,  arms,  artillery,  and  every- 
ihing  else  that  was  required  for  the  undertaking  of  this 
enterprise  (leaving  Goa  in  good  order), set  out,  hut 
when  he  had  made  his  course  so  far  forward  at  the  shoals 
of  Padua,'  and  found  that  he  could  not  get  beyond  them  be- 
cause the  season  was  now  so  far  advanced,  he  put  back  again 
into  harbour,  and  came  to  an  anchor  with  all  his  fleet  over 
against  the  bar  of  Goa,  and  after  having  dropped  anchor, 
he  ordered  Rodrigo  Rabelo,  captain  of  the  city,  to  be  sum- 
moned, and  told  him  that  on  account  of  the  adverse  state 
of  the  weathe%  and  because  the  monsoon  of  the  Straits  and 
Ormuz  was  already  gone  by,  and  there  was  no  longer 
any  opportunity  of  navigating  to  those  parts,  it  was  his  in- 
tention to  go  and  winter  at  Malaca  and  see  if  ho  could  in 
any  way  chastise^he  Malays  for  the  treason  which  they  had 
practised  upon  Diogo  Lopez  de  Sequeira;  therefore  be 

1 See  the  B[alxos]  de  Padua,  13  dbg.  N.  lat..  on  Fem«o  Vaz  Donradi/i 
Map  of  Iiidia,  vol.  ii,  p.  1. 


66  (JOplIBNTAKIEa  or 

greatly  ooromended  to  him  the  charge  of  taking  oare  of 
city,  foifthe  city  was  always  the  uppermoi|t  thought  of  his 
heart)^  dreading  lest  the  Hidalcfto  should  attack  it  again; 
and  from  that  port  he  went  on  to  Cauanor,  and  leaving  the 
fortress  provided  with  more  men  than  it  had^  he  pet  out 
again  for  Cochim. 

As  soon  as  the  king  learned  that  Afonso  Dalboquerque 
was  on  the  bw;  he  lost  no  time  in  visiting  him  on  board  his 
vessel,  and  gave  him  a long  list  of  reasons  why  he  ought 
not  to  go  to  Malaca,  for,  he  said,  the  affairs  of  Goa  were 
still  in  so  critical  a state,  that  it  required  him  personally  to 
control  them ; and  in  addition  to  this,  the  (^amorim  of  Cali- 
cut was  in  such  a state  of  disaffection,  that  for  his  part 
should  not  be  surprised  if  he  broke  out  into  open  treason 
directly  he  heard  of  his  departure  from  India.  But  although 
this  statement  by  the  King  of  Coohim  had  a great  show  of 
reason  in  it,  yet  in  it  he  did  not  express  his  own  sentiments, 
but  the  design  of  oausif^g  Afonso  Dalboquerque  to  abandon 
his  voyage  to  was  conceived  by  the  advice  of  Chiri- 

namercar  andi^amalemercar,  two  Moorish  merchants,  men 
full  of  all  kinds  of  evil  and  worthless  designs. 

Now  the  principal  cause  of  thoir  giving  this  counsel  was, 
that  they  feared  lest  Afonso  Dalboquerque  should  capture 
the  ships  which  they  had  sent  to  Malaca;  and  if  Malaca 
vere  taken,  they  would  be  left  without  any  means  of  trying 
n the  whole  of  that  archipelago,  from  Cape  Comorim  east- 
vards,  for  they  were  the  richest  merchants  in  the  whole  of 

alabar.  And  although  Afonso  Dalboquer^e  clearly  per- 
^ived  that  those  merchants  bad  deceived  the  poor  king  in 
)6rsuading  him  to  turn  aside  from  the  course  ha  really 
vished  to  pursue,  yet  bemuse  the  king  was  fnendly  to  us,  ^ 
Ifonso  Dalboquerque  dissembled  with  hi^'and  pretended 
lot  to  see  through  the  plpt^  and  told  him  that  his  mind  was 
low  quite  made  up  to  accomplish  that  voyage,  because  the 
' Porqiii  a kcava  airaveiada  na  gargonta. 


AirONSO  BiLBOQtJABQUE. 


57 


season  irottld  nqt  permit  of  his  passing  over  to  the  Straits 
in  accordance  w^h  the  orders  he  had  received  from  the 
king  D.  Manuel,  his  lord ; but^  he  said  he  trusted  in  Qod 
that  the  king  of  Cochim  would  very  soon  hear  news  of  how 
thoroughly  he  had  taken  vengeance  for  the  treason  which 
had  been  practised  in  that  city  of  Malaca  upon  the  Portu- 
guese ; and  that  Goa  was  in  so  strong  a condition  that  he 
should  not  be  afraid  even  if  all  the  power  of  -the  Hidalcfto 
were  brought  to  bear  against  the  city. 

When  this  conversation  was  over  which  Afonso  Dalboquer- 
que  held  with  the  king,  he  took  his  leave  of  him,  and  sent 
for  Manuel  de  Lacerda,  whom  he  found  there,  and  because 
his  fleet  was  but  small  he  reinforced  him  with  four  small 
ships  more,  and  two  large  ships,  men,  and  munitions  of 
war,  with  instructions  that  in  the  month  of  August  he  was 
to  proceed  to  unite  with  the  other  ships  which  he  would 
then  find  cruising  off  the  bar  of  Goa ; and  ho  gave  him 
also  plenary  jurisdiction  over  all  the  other  captains  who 
should  come  there,  that  they  should  obey  him,  as  though  he 
represented  Afonso  Dalboquerque  in  person;  and  he  was 
ajways  to  cruise  along  that  coast  in  order  to  be  able  to 
render  assistance  if  the  affairs  of  Goa  required  it ; and 
then  Afonso  Dalboquerque  dismissed  him  to  get  his  fleet  in 
readiness,  while  be  himself  gave  orders  to  his  captains  to 
lift  their  cables  and  set  sails. 


CHAFIBR  XIV. 

How  the  great  Aform  Dalboquerque  set  uail  from  Coohitn,  and  made 
his  way  direct  to  Malaca,  and  of  what  paaaed  thereupon. 

j 

The  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque,  having  thus  taken  his 
leave  of  the  King  of  Cochim  and  dispatched  Manuel  de 
tiftCerdft,  who  was  to  remain  bphind  as  chief  captun  of  that 
Coast,  set  sail  with  all  his  fleet,  which  consisted  of  eighteen 


69 


COMUENTABXES  OF 


Bailing  voBsek,  three  of  which  were  galleys.  The  captains 
were*— D.  Jofto  de  Lima;  Pernao  Telez  Dandrade  ; Caspar 
de  Paiva)  James  Teixeira;  Bastiam  de  Miranda;  Aires 
Pereira;  Jorge  Nunes  de  Lifto ;'Dinis  Fernandez  de  Melo^ 
chief  PatrOo ; Pero  Dalpoem,  Auditor  of  India ; Antonio 
Dabreu ; Nuno  Vaz  de  Castelo-branco ; Simao  Dandrade ; 
Duarte  da  Silva ; Simfto  Martinz ; Afonso  Pessoa ; Simfto 
Afonso ; and*  Jorge  Botelho ; and,  proceeding  on  their  way, 
when  they  had  got  as  far  forward  as  Ceilao  (Ceylon),  they 
caught  sight  of  a ship. 

Afonso  Dalboquerque  gave  orders  to  chase  her,  and  they 
took  her,  and  ho  was  very  glad  to  find  it  belonged  to  the 
Guzerates,  as  he  felt  his  voyage  would  now  be  carried  out 
safely,  for  the  Guzerates  understand  the  navigation  of  those 
parts  much  more  thoroughly  than  any  other  nations,  on  ac- 
count of  the  great  commerce  they  carry  on  in  those  places. 
And  while  the  fleet  was  in  this  latitude  a storm  arose,  during 
which  the  galley  which  was  commanded  by  Captain  Simfto 
Martinz,  was  lost ; for,  without  his  knowledge,  the  ship 
had  been  loaded  with  copper,  and  she  sprung  a leak  at  the 
prow,  and  the  force  of  the  storm  drove  her  over  on  her  side, 
and  she  foundered,  but  all  the  people  were  saved,  for  Duarte 
da  Silva  stood  by  the  ship  in  his  great  galley,  which  was 
all  ready  for  the  emergency.  And  when  all  the  men  had 
been  brought  off  the  wreck,  Afonso  Dalboquerque  l§d  the 
whole  fleet,  and  brought  up  at  anchor  in  the  harbour  of 
/Pedir,^  having  in  his  company  five  Guzerate  vessels  which 
» he  had  captured  on  the  voyage. 

And  there  he  found  Jofto  Yiegas  and  eight  Christians  of 
the  company  of  Buy  de  Araujo,  who  had  arrived  thus  far  in 
their  flight  from  the  ci^  of  Malaca,  and  Jofto  Yiegas  re^ 
counted  to  him  how  the  Emg*of  Malactf^  Ifad  endeavoured 
to  force  them  to  become  Moors,  and  had  ordered  some  of 

> A harbour  on  the  northern  oo^t  of  the  Island  of  Sumatra,  5 deg.  24 
miu.  N.  lat.,  96  deg.  4 min.  £.  long.,  a little  to  the  east  of  Acbeen, 


AVOlfSO  DALBOQUSBQTJE. 


50 


them  to  be  tied  hand  and  foot  and  cironmoised ; and  they 
had  Buffered  many  torments  because  they  would  not  deny 
the  faith  of  J esus  Christ.  And  one  night,  when  they  were 
all  ready  to  flee  away,  they  were  discovered,  and  Ruy 
Baraujo  and  those  who  were  now  with  him  were  left  behind, 
because  that  they  were  unable  to  escape.  And  he  declared 
further  that  with  the  King  of  Pac4  there  was  a principal 
Moor  of  Malaoa  whose  name  was  Naodabogoa,^  who  had  been 
the  chief  author  of  the  treason  which  had  been  plotted 
against  Diogo  Lopez  de  Sequeira ; and  this  man  had  fled 
from  Malaca  because  ho  and  the  Bondard,  whom  the  king 
killed,  haa  laid  a j}lan  to  kill  the  king  and  take  possession 
of  the  kingdom. 

On  hearing  this  news  Afonso  Balboquerque  immediately 
took  his  leave  of  the  King  of  Pedir,  and  made  his  way  to 
Pacd,*  which  is  the  principal  port  of  the  Island  of  Sumatra, 
and  as  soon  as  he  arrived  there  he  sent  Jo&o  Yiegas  to  pay 
him  a visit,  and  to  declare  to  him  that  it  had  come  to  the 
knowledge  of  Afonso  Balboquerque  that  in  the  city  of  Pacd 
there  was  a Moor  who  was  fleeing  from  Malacca  who  was 
implicated  in  the  attempt  to  murder  certain  Portuguese, 
who  belonged  to  some  ships  which  the  King  of  Portugal,  his 
lord,  had  sent  to  <the  port  of  the  city  of  Malaoa,  and  that 

» The  JEdition  of  1676  reads  Naodabegea,  that  of  1774,  Maodabegea; 
but  from  the  recurrence  of  the  name  on  p.  62  there  can  be  no  doubt  that 
this  latter  is  a typographical  error.  For  the  meaning  of  the  first  part 
of  this  word,  see  vol.  i,  p.  227. 

* Pao6)  a harbou^  a little  to  the  east  of  Pedir,  on  the  northern  coast 
of  the  Island  of  Sumatra.  Barretto  de  Ilesonde  gives  “ Passen’'  and 
Porto  de  Passon”  in  Pedro  Berthelot’s  map  cUted  1636,  in  the  Sloan.  MS. 
197,  fo.  S90,  on  this  site.  K.  Johnston,  in  the  “ Royal  Atlas”,  spells  the 
pCice  “ Pasffler”  and  “ Jgasier”,  and  assigns^the  position  of  5 deg.  2 min. 
N.,  97  deg.  10  min.  E.  to  the  former ; and  that  of  5 deg.  10  min.  N.^ 
97  deg.  22  min.  E.  to  the  latter  place.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  Uiia 
is  a jnistak^.  The  spelling  adopted  by  Bcrthelot  is  an  illustration  of 
^*1^'  nasality  introduced  into  the  sound  of  final  vowels  by  the 

Por^iguese. 


60 


COUXBmRIXS  0? 


he  begged  him  of  his  goodness  to  oanse  this  Moor  to  be  de* 
livered  overto  him. 

The  King  of  Pac^  replied  that  it  was  quite  true  that  the 
Moor  had  been  there,  but  at  present  he  had  no  news  of  him, 
but  he  would  cause  very  diligent  search  to  be  made  after 
him,  and  when  he  was  found  he  would  hand  him  oyer  to 
Afonso  Dalboquerque.  And  when  the  king  had  sent  this 
reply  to  Afonso  Dalboquerque  he  advised  the  Moor  to  go 
straight  at  once  to  Malaca  and  give  the  king  notice  of  the 
approach  of  the  Portuguese,  for  when  ho  heard  this  news  he 
would  pardon  him,  and  reinstate  him  in  his  go^d  favour. 
As  soon  as  the  king  had  arranged  this  he  sent  to  Afonso 
Dalboquerque  to  say  that  he  had  ordered  search  to  be  made 
for  the  Moor  but  he  could  not  be  found,  and  he  thought  he 
must  have  fled  away,  for  he  could  not  learn  any  news  of  him 
anywhere  throughout  the  city.  But  as  Afonso  Dalboquerque 
perceived  that  all  this  was  deception  on  tho  part  of  the  king 
Ije  would  not  hold  any  further  communications  with  him’, 
but,  not  breaking  off  his  friendship,  he  sailed  away. 


CHAPTER  XV. 

How  tho  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  set  sail  from  the  port  of  Pao6,  and 
at  sea  he  sighted  a sailing  vessel  which  was  carrying  the  Moor 
who  was  flying  from  him,  and  how  he  sent  after  the  vessel,  and 
what  farther  took  place. 

As  soon  as  Afonso  Dalboquerque  bad  takSn  his  departure 
from  the  King  of  Pacd  he  ordered  the  fleet  to  set  sail,  and 
in  this  manner  so  sailing  along  a}l  together  with  a favouraUe 

they  caught  sightoof  a pmgajaoa}  This  is  tte  uamb 

* ** 

1 The  latter  part  of  this  .word  is  clearly  the  Portuguese  fem.  adj. 
for  Javanese.  The  Pmgajaoa  was  a sort  of  boat  impelled  by  oars. 
Bluteau  calls  the  Pangajoa  a kind  of  rawing  boat,  used  in  India.  It 
appears  to  be  different  from  the  Pangaio,  a sort  of  small  boat  composed 


AFOHSO  DALBOQUSEQUE. 


61 


of  a kind  of  long  vessel,  very  fast  sailing,  used  in  that 
country ; and  as  £he  windjyiyi  drj^^pped  by  this  time,  and 
Aires  Pereira,  captain  of  the  Taforea,  was  nearest  to  it, 
Afonso  Dalboquerque  signalled  to  him  to  give  chase.  Aires 
Pereira  got  into  his  boat  with  some  soldiers  and  set  out  m 
pnrsuit.  And  the  Moors  who  were  on  board  of  the  vessel 
defended  themselves  with  so  maich  spirit  that  they  wounded 
Aires  Pereira  and  a considerable  number  of  his'people  with- 
out their  being  able  to  get  in. 

Not  content  with  thus  defending  his  vessel  the  captain, 
although  jie  was  severely  wounded,  leaped  dnwn  to  Aires 
Pereira  in  his  bqat,  and  they  fought  with  cuts  and  blows 
at  each  other,  and  there  was  |it  length  despatched;  and 
then  our  people  boarded  the  p:-^gajaoa  and  put  to  death 
all  the  Moors  who  sought  to  Any  defence,  and  took 

seven  or  eight  prisoners,  npjl'  gathered  themselves  together 
again  in  their  boat,  and  there  they  found  the  Moorish  captain 
half  dead,  without  any  blood  flowing  from  the  numerous 
wounds  he  had  received. 

Aires  Peroira  commanded  the  mariners  to  throw  him  into 
the  sea  just  as  he  was ; but  when  they  perceived  that  he  was 
richly  clothed,  they  sought  first  of  all  to  strip  him,  and  then 
they  found  on  hiS  left  arm  a bracelet  of  bone,  set  in  gold, 
and  when  they  took  this  off  all  his  blood  flowed  away  and 
he  expired.  Aires  Pereira  was  so  surprised  at  this  that  he 
took  the  bracelet  and  the  captive  Moors  to  Afonso  Dalbo- 
querque, and  recounted  to  him  all  that  had  passed,  and 
Afonso  Dalboquerque  inquired  of  the  Moors  who  that  Oap- 

of  boards  tied  together  with  cords  only.  “ Navigiura  Pangaio,  e levi  et 
mro  Ugno  oonstructura,  non  nisi  funibus  colligatum  eat,  nullo  omnino 
(4avo  ferreo  infixo”//iw<.  Tnd.  OnfuL,  p.  ^20).  Caraoes  calls  it  mtU, 
“lightly  skimming’^  in  tho  line — 

“Os  PangayoB  sutis  da  bruta  gente.” — i,  92.  ^ 

Mirow  «u)  Ughtly  built,  the  PuDgaio  U capable  of  oartylng  a 
soQsfcderable  burden. 


4t/  COMKBNmRIBS  OF 

taia  was^  and  what  was  the  use  of  that  bracelet  to  him 
which  he  wore;  and  they  replied  that  he  was  a prinoipai 
Moor  of  Malaca^  whose  name  waa  Naodabeguea/  and  he  was 
, On  his  way  to  warn  the  king  of  the  coming  *of  the  Portu- 
gnese,  and  the  bracelet  was  formed  of  the  bones  of  certaia 
animals  which  woro  called  cabals,^  that  are  bred  in  the 
mountain  ranges  of  the  kingdom  of  Siam^  and  the  person 
who  carries  those  bones  so  that  they  touch  his  flesh  can 
never  lose  his  bloody  however  many  wounds  he  may  receive, 
so  long  as  they  are  kept  on  him.  Afonso  Dalboquerque 
was  much  mdVed  at  the  death  of  the  Moors  from  whom  he 
had  hoped  to  obtain  information  concerning  the  state  of 
affairs  at  Malaca,  and  he  prized  the  bracelet  very  much 
for  its  virtues,  and  kept  it  to  send  it  to  the  king  D. 
Manuel. 

When  Aires  Pereira  had  returned  into  his  own  ship,  the 
whole  fleet  went  back  along  the  coast  in  the  same  order  as 
they  had  first  come,  and  when  they  were  in  the  latitude  of 
the  Powder  Island^  they  sighted  two  very  large  junks,  and 
Wave  chase  to  them.  One  of  these,  which  was  from  Ohoro- 
linandel,^  struck  immediately;  the  other,  from  Jaoa/  would 
not  do  so;  Afonso  Dalboquerque  therefore  ordered  Pero 
Dalpoem  to  go  up  close  and  call  upon  herHo  surrender,  and 
if  she  would  not  do  so,  then  to  attack  her  at  close  quarters ; 
and  as  it  happened  that,  in  the  act  of  boarding  thb  junk, 
our  own  men  were  closely  pressed,  the  Javanese  wounded 

* Called  Maodabcgea,  on  p,  59,  n. 

* Cabais,  JoSo  do  Barros,  in  Decad,^  ii,  f.  139,  col.  23,  relates  a 

similar  circumstance  to  this  here  described ; no  description  of  this 
fabulous  creature  is  recorded  by  Bluteau,  who  mentions  the  pass- 
«ge.  • ^ * 

* Polroreira,  shown  in  Barrette  d5  Resende’s  copjr  of  Pedro  Berthe- 
lot's  map  as  Polverera,  an  island  in  the  Straits  of  Malaca.  MS.  Sloan, 
J97,  f.  890;  Keith  Johnston  does  not  mention  it. 

* Cpromandei,  or  Karimanal,  Madras  Presidency,  13  deg.  24  min.  K., 

80  deg.  19  min.  E.  * Java. 


AFOK^O  DAtijBOQUBRQUK. 


63 


80T6iid  of  ^itE  arrowSj  and  hampered  the  gear  of 

Ihe  Ittizen-saU' and  iho  bcwapri^ 

When  Pero  Dalpoem  perceived  that  hia  rigging  waa  thus 
destro^ed^  he  disengaged  his  ship  from  the  junk^  and  drew 
off  from.  her.  But  Afonso  Dalboquerque^  who  was  the 
nearest  to  him^  as  soon  as  he  saw  Pero  Dalpoem  disengaging 
himself,  drew  up  close  and  demanded  the  surrender  of  tho 
junk,  which  was  about  six  hundred  tons  burden,  very  well 
supplied  with  arms,  and  carrying  three  hundred  fighting 
men  on  board ; and  fearing  lest  her  men  should  set  her  on 
lire  as  soon  as  he  had  grappled  her — a custom  which  the 
Javanese  have  when  they  find  themselves  overcome  by  the 
enemies — Afonso  Dalboquerque  ordered  the  master*  of  bis 
ship  to  take  the  ship’s  boat,  ready  with  a cable  through  the 
ship^s  hawses,*  with  orders  to  the  effect  that  he  was  to 
arrange  so  as  to  be  able  to  past  off  the  cable  whenever  ho 
wished,  if  the  Javanese  should  set  fire  to  the  ship. 

When  this  had  been  set  in  order,  Afonso  Dalboquerque 
drew  up  close  alongside  the  junk  and  began  to  fire  into  her 
with  his  bombards ; and  as  the  enemy  would  not  even  yet 
yield,  although  there  were  already  forty  of  them  killed  and 
a great  number  of  the  others  wounded,  he  got  ready  to 
board  her.  As  so6n  as  the  Javanese  poficeived  that  they 
were  overpowered  by  tjie  ship,  the  Flor  de  la  Mar,  which 
was  built  with  very  lofty  castles,  they  set  fire  to  the  junk. 


* Traqvete.  Jal  interprets  this  rightly  as  the  Voiie  de  misainey  or  mizen 
sail ; it  was  also  called  the  Iraqwte  davante.  Moracs  wrongly  defines  it 
to  be  a vela  do  mastro  mats  alto  do  navio.  It  is  the  tnnchetto  of  tho 
Italians.  Bluteau  calls  it  the  “ Vela  pequcnay  atada  a pega  main  alta  do 
maetro  grande^ 

I Goroup^ ; also  gouroupiz  and  gurupes. 

• Mestre,  probably  mste,  through  Maitre*  Fr. 

♦ EsconvUy  an  indeclinable  pluml,  sometimes  written  eseovha  and 
mouves.  Jal  quotes  the  passage  in  more  than  one  place  in  his  Gheeaire 
Nautiquey  as  escouves ; but  the  raisprint’of  esconveiy  if  it  is  one,  is  found 
in  the  early  edition,  as  well  as  the  later  one,  of  the  Commintariu,  The 
lyord  aj^ears  to  be  derired  from  excuhim,  Lat. ; ^cuWer,  Fr. 


COXitlENTAftlKS  0|> 


It  was  not  until  the  flames  reached  the  ship  that 
Balboquerque  gave  qrders  to  the  mate  to  unhook  his  ship 
and  cast  off  from  the  junk,  and  draw  away  out  from  between 
the  vessels.  The  Javanese  no  sooner  observed  the  shadow 
of  the  towering  ship  passing  away  from  over  them,  than 
they  set  to  work  to  extinguish  the  fire  in  their  own  vessel, 
but  as  it  had  by  this  time  become  very  extensive,  they  could 
only  do  so,  with  very  great  difficulty,  and  this  compelled 
them  to  surrender. 

The  junk  having  now  surrendered,  Afonso  Balboquerque 
discovered  that  the  King  of  Pac^  was  on  board,  and  so  he 
sent  for  him,  and  when  he  saw  him  he  bejgged  his  pardon 
very  earnestly  for  this  unfortunate  affair  which  should  not 
have  happened  if  he  had  known  of  his  Royal  Highness  being 
on  board,  and  he  showed  him  those  ceremonies  and  that 
good  treatment  which  is  due  to  a personage  of  such  dignity ; 
and  when  he  had  entertained  him  and  taken  care  for  some 
of  his  servants  who  had  got  badly  wounded  in  the  tight, 
the  king,  gave  him  an  account  of  his  misfortune,  setting 
forth  how  he  was  on  his  way  to  the  King  of  Java,  who  was 
his  relative,  to  ask  his  assistance  with  soldiers  and  a fleet 
against  one  of  his  governors  who  had  risen  up  in  rebelliou 
with  the  kingdom  against  him,  but  if  ’^he,  Afonso  Balbo- 
querque, would  undertake  this  enterprise  and  reseat  him  in 
his  estate  again,  then  he  would  become  a vassal  of  the  King 
of  Portugal,  and  pay  him  tribute. 

Afonso  Balboquerque,  considering  that  the  trade  of  Pac4 
would  be  of  great  importance  to  Malaca,  it  he  took  it,  on 
account  of  the  great  quantity  of  pepper  that  the  Island 
contains,  told  him  that  he  was  now  engaged  on  an  expedi* 
tion  for  settling  accounts  with  the  Kiijg  of  Malaca  for  an 
injustice  which  he  had  done  to  a captain  of  the  King  of 
Portugal  his  lord,  who  had  reached  that  port  under  the 
royal  safeguard,  but  when  this  had  been  completed  he  would 
promise  that  upon  his  return  voyage  to  India  he  would 


AFONSO  DALBOQUSICQUB. 


05 


replace  Him  in  the  possession  of  his  kingdom.  The  king 
thanked  him  very  much  for  his  promises  of  assistance,  and 
declared  ho  would  remain  there  in  the  ship  with  him,  and 
ordered  those  who  were  in  the  junk  to  follow  him.  And 
when  the  fleet  was  now  close  to  Malaca,  Nuno  Vaz  do 
Castelo-Branco  captured  a very  rich  junk  which  had  just 
sailed  out  of  the  port,  bound  for  the  kingdom  of.Siam,  and 
from  the  Moors  who  were  taken  in  her  Afonso  Dalboquorque 
learned  that  Ruy  Daraujo  and  the  Portuguese  of  his  com- 
pany were  alive,  and  that  the  king  already  knew  of  his 
coming. 

So  numerous  yrere  the  ships  that  they  passed  on  that 
voyage,  tjiat  had  it  not  been  Afonso  Dalboquerquo^s  deter- 
mination to  go  to  Malaca,  they  could  have  taken  the  largest 
prize  that  was  ever  beheld  in  those  parts ; for  it  was  just 
the  time  of  the  monsoon  when  the  Moors  navigate  to  the 
kingdoms  of  India  which  lie  to  the  east  of  Cape  Comorim, 
but  during  the  other  monsoon  they  make  their  way  direct 
to  the  Straits  of  M^ca,  laden  with  all  sorts  of*  different 
spices  which  are  brought  to  Malaca.  But  inasmuch  as 
Afonso  Dalboquerque  desired  to  have  secure  peace  and 
friendship  with  all  the  kings  and  Hindoo  lords  who  have 
their  territories  on' the  South,  and  to  trade  in  their  ports — 
as  the  King  D.  Manuel  had  ordered  that  the  commerce  of 
Malaca  should  not  be  destroyed, — he  treated  all  the  ships 
which  he  passed  on  the  way  with  good  will  and  entertain- 
ment, and  to  their  captains  he  showed  every  kindness  in  the 
name  of  the  king  of  Portugal,  and  gave  them  safe  conducts, 
jsnabling  them  to  navigate — provided  they  did  not  go  to  the 
Straits — and  at  this  they  were  very  well  pleased. 


vou.  irr. 


F 


66 


COMMENTARIES  OF 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

How  the  great  Afonso  Dalboqueiqae  reached  the  port  of  Malaoa,  and 
the  king  sent  immediately  to  visit  him^  and  the  rest  that  took 
place. 

When  tJiie  great  Afonsd  Dalboqiierqne  had  taken  the 
king  of  Pacd  into  his  ship,  he  continned  his  course  and 
sailed  up  to  the  shoals  of  Capaoia^,  and  entered  the  twelve 
fathom  passage,  and  reached  the  harbour  of  Malaca  one  day 
at  evening  with  all  his  fleet  decked  with  flags,  and  the  men 
sounding  their  trumpets,  and  ordered  themio  salute  the  city 
with  all  the  artillery,  and  proceeded  to  cast  anchor  in  front 
ofJthflJ^aFbour,  And  when  the  fleet  had  thus  anchored, 
the  king  immediately  sent  a Moor  with  a message  to  Afonso 
Dalboquerque,  asking  what  was  the  object  of  so  great  a 
fleet ; whether  he  came  for  war  or  for  peace,  for  he  did  not 
wish  for  anything  else  than  peace  with  the  king  of  Portugal ; 
and  gividg  him  to  know  that  his  Bendara  had  been  put  to 
death  by  his  orders  on  account  of  his  complicity  in  the 
rising  which  had  taken  place  against  the  Portuguese  cap- 
tain (Diogo  Lopez  de  Sequeira)  who  had  come  to  that  port, 
and  resulted  in  the  murder  of  the  Christians  who  were  in 
the  land,  but  this  was  no  fault  of  his. 

Afonso  Dalboquerque  listened  to  this  artful  apology,  and 
dissembled  with  him,  in  hopes  of  getting  Ruy  de  Araujo 
and  the  other  Christians  who  were  there  in  Ijjis  power  again, 
so  he  replied  that  he  was  well  aware  how  little  the  king  of 
Malaca  was  to  blame  in  the  matter  of  the  treachery  shown^ 
to  the  captain  of  the  king  his  lord,  and  now  that  the  ki^g 
had  at  length  avenged  tSe  death  fke  Shrjstians  whom  the 
Bendarii  had  put  to  death,  by  cutting  off  his  head,  he  begged 
he  would  of  his  favour  cause  those  who  were  left  alive  to  be 

* In  the  Straits  of  Malaca,  to  the  north  of  the  city, 


AFONSO  DALBOQUERQUE. 


67 


delivered  up,  and  pay,  out  of  the  property  of  the  Bcndara, 
for  all  the  goods  which  had  been  seized. 

The  king  lost  no  time  in  sending  the  Moor  back  to 
declare  to  Afonso  Dalboquerque  that  they  should  make 
peace  first,  and  then  he  would  send  back  the  Christians  and 
make  satisfaction  for  all  that  had  been  taken.  Afonso 
Dalboquerque  replied  that  he  would  not  make*  peace  until 
the  Christians  had  been  sent  back  and  all  the  king's  pro- 
perty restored,  according  to  the  terms  of  his  first  answer 
sent  through  the  same  Moor,  and  when  ho  had  received 
everything,  there  would  be  time  to  talk  of  peaco,  for  this 
was  what  the  king  his  lord  desired,  and  it  was  for  this 
object  that  the  King  of  Portugal  had  sent  him  thither,  for 
this  fleet  had  not  come  in  search  of  a cargo,  but  to  make 
war  upon  the  king  of  Malaca,  if  he  would  not  come  to 
terms  of  peace  with  the  king  his  lord. 

Notwithstanding  all  this,  the  king  still  refused  to  deliver 
up  Ruy  de  Araujo  and  the  Christians  withcnit  first  making 
peace,  for  he  thought  by  this  means  to  curb  the  spirit  of 
Afonso  Dalboquerque  ; but  he,  on  his  part,  determined  not 
to  come  to  any  terms  until  tho  Christians  were  first  of  all 
restored  to  him,  as  well  as  all  the  property  which  had  been 
detained,  and  so  these  negotiations  wont  on  from  one  side 
to  the  other  until  the  king  of  Malaca  began  to  put  into 
practice  some  of  his  artifices,  and  ordered  a fleet  of 
launches^  to  issue  out  of  the  river,  and  when  they  had 
made  a good  master  with  men  and  artillery  they  withdrew 
again ; with  these  trickeries^  and  follies  they  thought  to  get 
.the  advantage  of  Afonso  Dolboquorque,  but  he  put  up  with 
everything  in  hopes  of  getting  Ruy  de  Araujo  into  his 

* Lancharas,  w 

» Biocos,  A word  employed  chiefly  in  the  phrase  andar  a 
of  Women  that  walk  about  with  a cloak*  that  covers  the  greater 
their  faces  and  one  eye,  so  that  they  can  see  other  people  without  hAfawii 
known. 


68 


COMKENTABIES  Of 


hands  again,  for  he  remembered  how  the  Viceroy  had  sent 
him  in  company  with  Diogo  Lopez  de  Sequeira  in  disgrace 
to  Malaca,  on  his  account.^  And  being  informed  by  Buy 
de  Araujo  that  the  king  was  causing  certain  stockades 
of  very  great  strength  to  bo  erected  along  the  seaboard, 
Afonso  Dalboquerque  sent  word  to  the  King  of  Malaca  to 
say,  that  it’djd  not  look  like* a sign  of  good  friendship  when 
he  would  not  send  back  his  Portuguese  but  ordered  the 
erection  of  stockades,  like  one  who  rather  desired  war  than 
peace ; and  how  differently,  ho  said,  had  the  king  of  Face 
behaved  to  him,  for  as  soon  as  his  port  was  reached  ho 
immediately  sent  back  nine  Portuguese  \^o  had  got  away 
so  far  in  their  flight  from  the  bondage  in  which  ho,  the  king 
of  Malaca,  had  held  them ; but  it  seemed,  indeed,  as  if 
there  was  no  arriving  at  any  settlement  with  him.  The 
king,  in  spite  of  all  these  arguments,  still  determined  not 
to  surrender  the  Christians  without  first  of  all  making  a 
treaty  of  peace. 

Afonso  Dalboquerque  saw  through  this  design  of  the 
king;  and  in  order  that  he  should  not  think  that  he  had 
produced  any  effect  by  this  display  of  launches  in  the  river 
which  were  making  a great  show  there  every  day  according 
to  the  king’s  orders,  he  decided  to  undeceive  him,  and  so  he 
gave  orders  that  an  expedition  of  four  boats  well  armed 
with  fighting  men  and  artillery  should  be  got  ready,  and 
make  their  way  along  the  bank  and  throw  some  shots  from 
their  bombards  into  the  city.  When  the  Jdioors  perceived 
the  boats  setting  out  from  the  ships,  they  came  out  to  wait 
for  them,  beyond  the  river's  mouth,  in  a fleet  of  twenty 
f)angajaoa8,  armed  with  many  men.  No  sooner  had  Afoqjjo 
Dalboquerque  perceived  them^  than  he  ^rd^pred  a number  of 
boats  to  be  sent  ton'einforce  the  four  first  sent.  This  dis- 
concerted the  Moors,  who  observed  the  movement,  and 

> For  the  circumstances  concerning  the  carrying  of  Ruy  do  Araujo  to 
Malaca,  see  vol.  ii,  p.  45. 


AT^ONSO  DALBOQUUEQUE. 


69 


withdrew  themselves  back  again  into  the  river  with  their  fleet. 
And  when  they  had  retired  the  king  again  sent  the  accus- 
tomed messages,  full  of  deceit  and  specious  words  and  false- 
hoods, to  Afonso  Dalboquerque. 

And  Afonso  Dalboquerque  again  listened  to  them  with 
great  patience,  always  hoping  to  avoid  having  recourse  to 
war,  and  explaining  to  the  king  how  liis  coming  to  Malaca 
was  for  the  preservation  of  the  port,  and  for  the  making  of 
a treaty  and  ratiying  friendship  with  him;  and  by  no  means 
for  the  purpose  of  destroying  him.  But  as  there  were 
Moors  of  many  races  in  the  city,  all  of  whom  wore  anxious 
to  prevent  a^e^ceable  solution  of  this  matter — to  the  end 
that  our  people  should  not  get  a footing  in  the  land — they 
led  the  king  to  believe  that  Afonso  Dalboquerque 'would 
never  dare  to  attack  the  city,  but  as  soon  as  the  monsoon 
should  spring  up  ho  would  have  to  be 'gone  without  waiting 
«iny  longer.  And  a similar  thought  was  in  the  minds  of  his 
own  captains.  Those  who  most  laboured  to  prevent  peace! 
being  made  were  the  Guzarates,  for  all  the  trade  of  Cam-| 
baya  lies  at  Malaca,  and  they  offered  to  help  the  king  with; 
six  hundred  whites,  all  well  armed,  and  forty  bombards. 

And  besides  all  these  designs  which  the  king  entered 
into,  with  the  aid  bf  the  Moors  both  native  and  foreign,  Ruy 
de  Araujo  sent  word  to  Afonso  Dall^oquerquo  that  the 
stockades  were  fast  approaching  completion,  and  tho  king 
was  making  ready  for  his  defence ; and  the  Turks,  G^a- 
raSes,  Rumes.  and  Oora^onos  were  the  principal  ones 
who  were  advising  him  to  make  no  agreement,  but  to  for- 
bid our  people  to  make  any  settloraeut  in  the  land  j and  in 
order  to  carry  out  their  designs  they  were  giving  large 
[bribes  to  tho  king -and  his  governors ; and  they  had  also  on 
their  side  the  fcacizes,^  who  made  long  liaraugues  to  him, 

» Cacizes,  priests  whose  duty  was  to  recount  with  drainatio  vehemence 
in  high  places,  and  public  concourses,  the  circumstances  of  the  death  of 
fkt  Prophet. 


70 


OOMlfSNTARlES  OP 


declaring  that  the  Portuguese  were  renepides  and  thieves^ 
desirous  of  lording  over  the  whole  world,  and  that  he  would 
be  sorry  for  it  if  he  allowed  them  to  come  into  the  city. 
And  Ruy  do  Araujo  wont  on  to  say  that  the  Xabandari  of  the 
Guzarates,  who  was  the  mainstay  of  all  the  merchants  of 
Cambaya — a man  of  great  credit  with  the  king — had  gone 
to  the  king  and  begged  hifti  very  earnestly  not  to  make 
friendship  with  the  Portuguese  nor  come  to  any  terms  of 
peace  with  them/  for  their  ships  and  those  of  the  Moors 
could  not  navigate  in  one  and  the  same  course  in  one  and 
the  same  monsoon,  neither  could  they  take  in  their  cargoes 
all  together  in  the  same  port,  for,  if  this  jvas  a matter  of 
keen  competition,  even  when  all  engaged  were  of  one  nation, 
how  much  more  difficult  would  those  things  be,  seeing  that 
tlieso  on  the  one  hands  were  Moors,  and  the  Portuguese, 
on  the  other  hand,  Christians,  desirous  to  destroy  them  and 
procuring  the  destruction  of  them  all ; and  the  Xabandar* 
declared  that  he  gave  him  this  advice  because  he  was  very 
desirous  of  doing  him  a service,  and  preserving  the  king- 
dom ; and  he  ought  to  temporize  with  the  chief  captain  of 
that  (Portuguese)  fleet,  and  keep  up  negotiations  with  him, 
for  when  the  monsoon  should  come,  he  could  not  remain 
there  any  longer. 

The  king  was  well  pleased  with  the  advice  given  by  the 
Xabandar,  and  discussed  it  all  with  his  governors,  and  they 
all  were  of  opinion  that  such  a policy  should  be  carried  out ; 
therefore  ho  ordered  that  his  fleet  should  be  repaired  imme- 
diately, to  the  end  that  it  might  be  prepared  for  anything 
that  might  happen,  and  that  the  work  of  the  stockades 
should  be  pressed  on  more  quickly. 

w 

' See  vol.  ii,  p.  132.  The  meaning  of  the  term'*  is  ^^Lord  of  the 
Shore”. 


iVONSO  BAiaOQTJJBBQUE. 


71 


CHAraER  XVll. 

Of  the  site  and  foundation  of  the  kingdom  and  city  of  Malaca. 
The  kingdom  of  Malaca^  on  the  one  side  is  co-terminous 

‘ Camdes  makes  the  prophetic  Siren  sing : — 

“ Maia  avante  fareia,  qiie  ao  conhe^a 
Malaca  por  eraporio  ennobrecido, 

Onde  toda  a ijrovincia  do  mar  graudo 
Suas  mercadorias  ricas  mande. 

“ Dizem  quo  desta  terra,  co'as  posaantes 
Oiidas  o mar  entrando,  dividio 
A nobre  ilha  Samatra,  qiie  j4  d’antes 
Juntas  ambas  a geuto  antigua  vio : 

Chersoneeo  foi  dita,  e das  prestaiites 
V eaa  d’ouro,  quo  a terra  produzio, 

Aurea  por  cpitheto  Ihe-ajuntaram, 

Alguns  quo  foaao  Ophir  imaginaram. 

“ Mas  na  ponta  da  terra  Cingapura 
Ver4s,  ondo  o caminho  ndoe  so  estreita 
Oaqui,  toruando  a costa  ^ Cynosura, 

Se  encurva,  e para  a Aurora  se  endireita  : 

Vds  Fam,  Patano,  reinos,  e a longura 
Pe  Siiio,  que  estes  o outros  mais  sujcita ; 

Olha  0 Ho  Mcnao,  que  se  derrama 
Po  grande  lago,  que  Chiamai  se  chama.” 

X,  120-125. 

“ Malacca,  see  before  where  ye  shall  pitch 
Your  great  Empoiium,  and  your  Magazins ; 

The  Rendezvouz  of  all  that  Ocean  round 
For  Merchandizes  rich  that  there  abound. 

“ From  this  (’tis  said)  the  Waves’  irapetiious  course, 

Breaking  a passage  through,  jfrom  Main  to  Main, 
Samatra’s  noble  If  lo  of  old  did  force, 

Which  then  a Neck  of  Land  therewith  did  chain  : 

That  this  was  Cuermonehr  till  that  divorce, 

And  from  the  wealthy  mines,  that  there  remain, 


72 


COMMENTARIBS  OF 


with  the  kingdom  of  Queda»^  and  on  the  other  with  the 
kingdom  of  Pam/  and  would  have  about  a hundred  leagued 
of  coast,  and  in  breadth,  across  tho  land  up  to  a chain  of 
mountains  where  tho  kingdom  of  Siilo'’  stops,  it  would  bo 
about  ten  leagues.  All  this  land  of  old  was  subject  to  tho 
kingdom  of  SiiXo,  and  it  would  be  about  ninety  years/  a 
little  more  or  less— when  Afouso  Dalboquerque  arrived 
there — since  it  became  a kingdom  of  itself.  And  the  kings 
of  this  kingdom  became  in  time  so  powerful,  that  they  were 
called  Ooliois,  a word  used  among  them  for  Emperor.” 
Now,  because  it  is  necessary,  for  well  understanding  these 
corninentaries,  to  look  a little  further  into  tho  foundation  of 
Malaca,  T will  relate  here  whence  this  kingdom  derived  its 
first  beginning. 

At  tho  time  when  Malaca  was  founded,  there  reigned  in 
the  Island  of  Jaoa  a king  who  was  called  Bataratamurel, 

The  Epithito  of  Golden  had  annext: 

Some  think  it  was  the  OriiYU  in  th(j  Text, 

“But  at  tliat  Point  doth  Cinoapuk  api)ear  : 

Wlicro  the  piiicht  Streight  leaves  Sliips  no  room  to  play. 

Heer  tlie  Coast,  win<iing  to  the  iSorthorne  Bcare, 

Faces  the  fair  Aurora  all  the  way. 

See  Pan,  Patane  (ancient  Uealms  that  were), 

And  long  Syan,  which  These,  and  more,  obey! 

The  copious  River  of  Mknam  behold,  ' 

And  the  great  Lake  Chiamay  from  whence  ’tis  roll’d ! ” 

Fantthaw. 

‘ ' Queda,  or  Kidah,  7 deg.  6 min.  N.,  100  deg.  3^  min.  E. ; on  the 

western  aide  of  the  Malay  Peninsula. 

“ Quedri,  que  he  sd  cabe<ja 
Das  que  pimenta  alii  tern  produzido.’* 

^ Xw.,  X,  128. 

• Pahang,  8 deg.  36  min.  K.,  108  deg.  17  min.  E.,  on  the  eastern 

side  of  the  Peninsula.  / * Siam. 

♦ See  notes  derived  from  Col,  Yule’s  Marco  Pob^  at  end  of  this 
chapter, 


APOKSO  DALBOQUEftQUE. 


73 


Ifcud  in  tho  kingdom  of  Palimbfto^  which  lies  within  tho 
Jaland  of  Jaoa,  there  reigned  a Hindoo  king  whose  name 
was  Parimi^nra,  and  as  there  were  many  dissonslons  between 
them  they  at  length  came  to  an  understanding  that  Pari  mi- 
9ura  should  marry  one  of  the  daughters  of  Bataratnmnrel, 
who  was  called  Parimi^uri,  and  continue  paying  a certain 
tribute  to  tho  king  of  Jaoa  bis  father-in-law.  , T}ii.s  king 
PavimiQura,  when  a few  days  had  elapsed  after  ho  had  made 
tins  agreeinont,  repented  of  it,  and  rose* up  and  threw  off 
his  promise  of  obedience,  and  would  not  pay  tho  tribute  to 
his  father-in-law,  and  in  order  to  do  this  lie  coiiforred  with 
feoino  of  his  relatives,  and  put  his  intentions  into  practice. 

Whou  Bataratarnurol  perceived  that  his  son-in-law  had 
risen  up  in  rebellion  against  him/ and  was  unwilling  to  pay 
tho  tribute,  he  came  against  him  with  a large  force  and 
overcame  him,  and  took  away  his  kingdom  from  him  ; and 
Pariuiigura,  seeing  that  ho  was  worsted  and  fearing  lest  ho 
should  fall  into  the  hands  of  his  father-in-law,  fled  away 
with  his  wife,  his  children  and  his  slaves,  and  some  few 
remnants  of  his  forces,  in  a junk,  and  reached  Siagapura,^ 
which  was  a vmy  largo  and  vtny  populous  city — 
as  is  witnessed  by  its  great  ruins  which  still  appear  to 
this  very  day — b'eforo  tho  foundation  of  M;daca,  and  put 
himself  under  obedience  to  tho  king  of  Siao. 

Singapura,  whence  this  city  takes  its  nnme,  is  a channel 
through  which  all  tho  shipping  for  those  parts  passes,  and 
signifies  in  tho  Malay  language,  {rpar.ht‘rotis  dda  tf' ; and 
this  designation  suits  tho  place  very  well,  for  soinotimes  it 
happens  that  when  ships  arc  there  waiting  for  a monsooui 
there  comes  so  fierce  a storm  that  they  are  lost. 

When  tho  king,  Parimi^ura  had^arrived  at  this  port,  the 
captain  of  the* city,  whose  name  was  Tamagi,  seeing  him 
coming  in  this  plight,  entertained  him  in  his  house,  and 

* ? Pftlcmhang,  in  Sumatra  island,  2 deg.  46  miu.  S.,  104  deg.  50  miu. 

Sec  note  at  end  of  chapter.  Singapore. 


74 


COMUliNTABlKS  OF 


showed  him  many  honours.  But  Parimi9nra^  as  a payment 
for  the  good  treatment  he  had  received^  out  of  covetousness 
for  the  richness  of  the  land^  murdered  him  with  a creese  a 
week  after  his  arrival,  and  became  Lord  of  the  Channel  and 
population  that  there  were  in  it. 

As  soon  as  it  was  known  in  the  kingdom  of  Palimbfto 
how  prosperous  Parimigura^  had  become,  three  thousand 
natives  of  this  kingdom  made  their  way  to  the  king,  and 
these  ho  kept  with  him,  and  ho  lived  in  tho  city  of  Singa- 
pura  for  five  years,  robbing  every  one  who  passed  through, 
for  he  had  a numerous  fleet  of  launches  on  the  sea.  The 
Lord  of  Patand,^who  was  Tamugi  s brother,®  when  he  learned 
that  Parirai(^ura  had  murdered  his  brother,  and  had  made 
himself  lord  of  the  channel,  made  ready  and  fell  upon  him 
with  a largo  force,  and  being  assisted  by  those  of  the 
country  who  owed  him  a grudge  on  account  of  his  rapacity, 
overcame  him. 

ParimiQura  being  now  overcome  fled  away  and  went  up 
into  the  river  of  Muar,  where  he  found  some  fishermen  who 
lived  in  poverty,  and  commenced  again  to  get  land  into 
cultivation  to  produce  bread^  for  his  subsistence,  and  with  a 
little  fish  which  tho  fisherman  used  to  give  him  he  lived 
there  for  some  time ; and  some  people  whom  he  carried  with 
him  led  no  other  life  than  roving  as  robbers  over  the  sea  in 
launches  which  they  found. 

At  this  time  there  lived  also  in  tho  port,  where  now  the 
population  of  Malaca  is  located,  twenty  or  thirty  fishermen, 
who  supported  themselves  sometimes  by  fishing,  and  at 
other  times  by  robbing ; and  they  hearing  that  king  Pari- 

^ Patani,  in  the  Malay  P<fnin8ula,  6 deg.  56^mm,  N.,  101  .deg,  2 
min.  K.  * Note  the  altered  fonrf  of  this  name. 

* E come(0u  a fazer  terras  de,pdopera  se  manter;  it  maybe  that  there 
is  here  a play  on  the  word  terra  in  the  phrase  terras  de  pdo^  lamps  of 
bread,  as  it  were,  instead  of  the  expanse  of  territory  he  hod  formerly 
held  sway  over. 


AFONSO  DALBOQU JERQUE. 


mi(5ura  was  settled  at  Muar,  with  the  reputation  of  l)eing  a 
cavalier  and  man  of  spirit,  made  their  way  to  him  and  told 
him  that  in  the  country  whore  they  wore,  three  leagues' 
distance  along  a river,  there  was  a plain  which  was  called 
Bintao,^  very  fertile,  wherein  large  crops  of  rice  could  be 
grown,  as  well  as  all  other  things  required,  and  well  sup- 
plied with  water  for  drinkings  that  ho  ought  .to  remove 

» Bintang.  “ An  Island  called  Pcntam,  a very  wild  place.  All  the 
wood  that  grows  thereon  consists  of  odoriferous  trees.” — Marco  Polo^ 
Ed.  Yule,  ii,  2G1. 

Of  this  island,  situated  in  1 deg.  10  min.  N.  lat.,  104  deg.  30  min. 
E.  long.,  (yol.  Yule  writes  as  follows : — “ Pontam  is  no  doubt  the  Bin- 
tang  of  our  maps,  more  properly  Bentan,  a considerable  Island  at  the 
Eastern  extremity  of  the  Straits  of  Malaca.  It  appears  in  the  list  pub- 
lished by  Diilaurier  from  a Javanese  inscription,  of  the  kingdoms  con- 
quered in  the  fifteenth  century  by  the  sovereigiiH  reigning  at  Majapahit 
in  Java.  Bintang  was  for  a long  time  after  the  Poriuguese  conquest  of 
Malacca  the  chief  residence  of  the  Malay  Sultans  who  had  been  expelled 
by  that  conquest,  and  it  still  nominally  belongs  to  the  Sultan  of  Johore 
the  descendant  of  those  princes,  though,  in  fact,  rule<l  by  the  Dutch, 
whose  port  of  Rhio  stands  on  a small  island  close  to  its  western  shore. 
It  is  the  Bintak)  of  the  Portuguese,  whereof  Camoeus  speaks  as  the  per- 
sistent enemy  of  Malacca.”  The  passage  is  as  follows : — 

Mas  despois  que  as  estrollas  o chamarem, 

Succeder^^,  6 forte  Mascarenhas, 

E,  se  injustos  o mando  te  tomarem, 

Prometto-te  que  fama  eteriia  tenhas  I 
Para  teus  inimigos  confessarem 
Teu  valor  alto,  o fado  quer  que  venhas 
A mandar  inais  do  palmas  coroado, 

Q,ue  4o  fortuna  justa  acorn j:>anhado : 

“ No  reino  de  BinUlo,  quo  tantos  danoe 
TerA  a Malaca  rauito  tempo  feitos, 

N’  hum  so  dia  as  injurias  de  mil  annos 
VingarAs  90’  o valor  dc  illusti^  peitos  : 

Trabafhos  e perigos  in"humanos, 

Abrolhos  ferreos  mil,  passes  estreitos, 

Tranqueiras,  baluartes,  lamjas,  settas, 

Tudo  fico,  qv^c  rompaa  e sobincttas.” 

X,  56,  57. 


76 


COMMKNTARIBS  OF 


thither,  and  if  he  would  make  his  settlement  there,  they 
would  serve  him  and  become  his  tributaries. 

Parimi^ura,  having  received  this  information  which  the 
fishermen  had  given  to  him,  went  and  viewed  the  site,  and 
was  very  much  pleased  with  it  and  with  all  that  territory; 
and  returning  to  Muar  embarked  with  nil  his  household  and 
followers,  and  went  to  livo^  at  BintAo,  and  began  to  make 
extensive  sowings  of  grain^  and  orchards  of  fruit,  and  made 
some  very  largo  palaces  for  his  occupation,  and  became  so 
well  pleased  with  this  land  that  he  creal;e«l  the  fishermen  to 
bo  Nobles  and  Mandarins  of  his  household  out  of  recom- 
pense for  their  services  in  having  shown  him  the  situation ; 
and  because  the  harbour  was  commodious  and  very  deep 
with  good  water,  in  the  space  of  four  months  after  Pari mi- 
9ura  had  first  gone  thither,  there  was  a population  of  a 
hundred  inhabitants  where  the  city  of  Malaca  now  stands,^ 

• The  robbers  who  used  to  go  about  pirating  over  the  sea 
iu  launches  that  made  a practice  of  putting  into  the  port  of 
Malaca  for  water,  appreciating  the  favours  and  good  enter- 
tainment that  they  received  from  the  king  Parimi^ura,  began 
to  take  up  their  abode  there,  and  carry  thither  the  goods 
they  had  stolen,  and  a great  development  began  to  take 
place,  so  that  within  two  years  there  wks  a population  of 
two  thousand  inhabitants,  and  they  began  to  acquire  a 
steady  trade.  This  Parimigura  gave  the  name  of  Malaca 
to  the  new  colony,  because,  in  the  language  of  Jaoa,  when 
a mau  of  Palimbilo  flees  away  they  call  him  Malayo;  and 
since  ho  had  come  to  that  place  fleeing  from  the  kingdom 
of  l*alimbfto,  of  which  indeed  he  once  .was  king,  he  gave 
the  place  the  name  of  Malaca,  Others  say  that  it  was 

• From  this  text  it  would  appear  tfeat  the  city  of  Malaca  was  built  on 
the  plain  o/^Binfdo.  If  the- Btatenient  of  the  Commentark$  is  correct, 
Biutfio  can  hardly  be  identified*  with  the  Island  of  Bintang,  as  above, 
Very  poi^ibly  there  wore  several  sites  thus  named.  Bantam,  on  the 
West  Coast  of  Java,  is  another  example  of  the  name. 


AFOKSO  DALBOQCERQUE. 


77 


called  Malaca  because  of  the  numbers  of  people  who  camo 
there  from  one  part  and  the  other  in  so  short  a space  of 
time,  for  the  word  Malaca  also  signifies  to  meat,  and  there-  ( 
fore  they  gave  it  the  name  of  city  in  contradiction.  Of  I 
these  two  opinions  let  each  one  accept  that  which  he  thinks 
to  be  the  beat,  for  this  is  the  truth  of  the  matter. 

Batara  Tamurel,  having  poreeivod  the  rapid  growth  of 
affairs  at  Malaca,  and  the  prosperity  which  attended  his 
Bon-in-law,  reconciled  himself  with  him.  again  and  sent 
him  a great  many  supplies  at  his  expense;  and  because 
the  king  Parimicjura  was  a man  of  good  nature  and  treated 
with  kindness  those  who  visited  that  port,  the  inhabitants  / 
of  Pacd  and  of  Bongala^  began  to  trade  with  those  of| 
Malaca,  and  seven  years  after  Parimi^ura  had  .begun  this  ‘ 
population  of  Malaca,  he  died,  and  left  behind  him  a son 
whose  name  was  Xaquendarxa,  who,  though  he  was  a 
Hindoo,  married  a daughter  of  the  king  of  Pac^,  but  it 
would  not  have  been  very  difccult  to  make  him  turn  Moor, 
for  when  they  were  marriod,  either  by  reason  of  the  entrea- 
ties of  his  wife,  or  from  the  admonitions  of  his  father-in-law, 
very  few  days  elapsed  before  ho  became  a Moor.  And  this 
king  Xaquendarxa,  after  having  several  sons,  desired  to  go 
and  see  the  king  bf  China,  saying  he  wished  to  go  and  see 
a king  who  had  for  his  vassals  the  Javanese,  and  the 
Siamese,  and  people  of  all  other  known  lands;  so  ho  sot 
out  from  Malaca,  taking  with  him  a present  for  the  king  of  . 
China,  and  occupied  three  years  in  the  journey,  and  be- 
came his  vassal,  and  brought  back  with  him  a half  seal  in 
sign  of  vassalage,  and  obtained  permission  to  coin  small 
money  of  pewter,  which  money  he  ordered  to  bo  made  as 
soon  as  he  reachecj  Malaca;  and  it  ho  gave  tlio  name  of 
OaMcea,®  which  are  like  our  ceitiU,  and  a hundred  of  them  go 

* Bengal. 

* Cf.  “Aos  quaea  se  davao  duas  Caixas,  que  sam  tres  reis  da  noasa 
^laoeda”  (/K#/,  de  Fern,  Mend,  PlntOy  128,  col.  4).  Bluteau, — Ihe  Chinese 


78 


COMMBKTAfiiaS  OF 


to  the  calaimy  and  each  calaim  was  worth,  according  to  ah 
appointed  law,  eleven  reis  and  four  ceitila}  Silver  and 
gold  was  not  made  into  money,  bat  only  used  by  way  of 
merchandise. 

And  when  the  king  of  China  had  taken  his  leave  of 
Xaquondarx^,  ho  sent  with  him  a captain  who  was  to 
accompany  him  back  to  Makoa,  and  in  consequence  of  the 

Ij€  (?  Portug.,  /*)*  is  the  European  canh ; 100  ie  « 1 Candarim 
(?  Portug.  Calaiin). 

* We  hero  obtain  the  value  of  the  Calaim  (as  a coin),  which  is  men- 
tioned above,  at  p.  45.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  Blutcau  quotes  from 
the  Demdm  a j>aa8i\ge  where  the  word  is  used  as  equivalent  to  estanho^ 
and  calls  it  a fine  kind  of  Indian  pewter.  According  to  the  above,  the 
monetary  system  of  Malaca,  as  arranged  by  Xaquondarxa,  would  be— 

I Catxe^  or  Cash^  Malay  =«  1 Portuguese. 
lOO  Cuhx'it  = 1 Calaim  ~ 11  Reu^  4 CHtib. 

1 Bd  = Si-,-  Cdtib  or  Caixes. 

But  from  Bluteau’s  description  of  the  CeitH^  which  I translate  below, 
the  correspondence  between  the  ltd  and  Cdtil  is  different  from  this 
deduction.  “ or  Seitil^  as  though  one  said  Sextily  for  of  old  it  was 
a coin  which  was  equal  to  the  sixth  part  of  an  adarme  of  an  ounce). 
Others  say  that  Ceitil  is  derived  from  Cdta^  understanding  thereby  that 
this  coin  was  taken  from  the  city  of  Cdtn,  Others  will  have  it  that  the 
coin  was  called  Ceitil^  as  though  for  Settil,  because  seven  of  them  go  to 
the  copper  Ileal,  Francisco  Soarez  Toscano  says,  in  bis  Parallels^  p. 
129,  that  king  B.  Joao  I,  in  remembrance  of  bis  conquest  of  the  city  of 
Ceita,  ordered  copper  money  to  be  struck,  which  he  then  called  SeptU^ 
now  Cdtil^  of  which  six  go  to  the  copper  Jieal^  although  thfey  are  no 
longer  current  in  this  kingdom,  and,  indeed,  in  the  time  of  the  said 
author  they  were  only  current  in  Guimaraens,  where  flax  was  bought 
and  sold  by  the  Ceitil.  On  one  side  of  this  ooin,  the  ^d  king  ordered 
to  bo  placed  the  arms  of  Portugal ; on  the  other,  a city  along  the  water 
side,"  etc.  For  the  best  information  upon  the  native  currency,  the 
reader  will  do  well  to  consult  Kecherches  sur  les  Monnaies  dea  Indi- 
genes de  TArchipel  Indien  et  de  la  Peninsule  Malaie,  par  H.  C.  Milliw; 
Ottvrago  Posthume,  pabli5  ^ar  rinstitut  RoyalCi  pour  la  Fhilologie  et 
rEthuographie  de  ITnde  N^erlandaise.  La  Haye.  < M.  Nijhoff,  1871 
4to.  For  figures  of  tbeeld  coins,  see  the  work  of  Manoel  Bernardee 
Lopes  Fernandes,  entitled  Memoria  das  moedas  correntes  em  Porta- 
gar,  etc.;  among  the  ^^Memorias  da  Academia  Real  das  Solencias  de 
Lisboa,  2a  classe",  p.  96,  etc. 


AFONSO  DALBOQtJFRQUfi. 


79 


great  friendship  which  sprung  up  between  them  on  their 
road,  Xaquendarxa  married  one  of  his  daughters/  by  whom 
be  had  a son  whose  name  was  Rajapute,  from  whom  are 
descended  the  kings  of  Campar^  and  Pam.  And  a few 
days  after  his  return  to  Malaca  he  died,  and  his  eldest  son, 
whose  name  was  Modafaixa,  reigned  after  him. 

When  Modafaixa  came  to  the*throne  he  again  confirmed 
the  treaties  of  peace  which  his  father  had  mdde  with  the 
king  of  China,  and  of  Sido  and  of  Jaoa,  and  greatly  enno- 
bled Malaca,  and  always  kept  a fleet  on  the  sea,  and  con- 
quered many  lands,  and  took  the  kingdom  of  Campar  and 
of  Pam,  and  of  Dandargiri,  and  made  [the  kings  of]  them 
Moors  by  force  and  married  them  to  three  daughters  of  his 
brother*  Rajaputo.  When  he  had  done  this  ho  took  the 
name  of  Sultan  Madofaixa,'*  and  soon  after  died,  and  one 
of  his  sons,  named  Sultan  Marsusa,  became  king  after  him. 

This  king  when  he  began  to  govern  his  kingdom  built 
upon  the  mountain  of  Malaca  great  palaces  in  which  he 
lived,  and  because  he  was  afraid  lest  his  uncle  Rajaputo, 
who  was  at  Bentd.o,  should  rise  up  against  him  and  deprive 

* The  text  is  “ caaou-o  XaquendarxA  com  huraa  filha  sua”,  “ Xaquon- 
darx^  married  him  to  one  of  hia  daughters”;  but  from  the  context  and 
pedigree,  there  is  no  floubt  that  the  author  of  the  Commntarien  has 
trandated  wrongly  here  from  some  original  account.  The  article 
should  UQt  be  enclitic ; the  sentence  will  then  become  “ Xaquendarx4 
married”,  etc.,  as  I have  given  it;  and  this  is  borne  out  by  the  reading 
of  the  edition  of  1576.  “Casou  ho  Xaquendarxd”,  etc. 

* co^  a costa  que  Champd  so  chama, 

Cuja  mata  he  do  pao  cheiroso  oniada.”— Ztw.,  x,  129. 

‘‘  Here  (mark  it  I)  rufns  the  Coast  that  called  Champa, 

Whose  groves  smell  hot  of  Calambuco  Yrood.''-~Fauskaw. 

See  also  Yule’s  Marco  Polo,  ii,  248,  Book^iir,  chap,  v:  “ Of  the  Great 
Country  called  Chs^bS”;  which  the  learned  editor  identifies  with  “ the 
whole  coast  between  Tongking  and  Kamboja,  inclmling  all  that  ie  now 
called  Cochin  China  outside  of  Tongking”.— f?>.,  p.  250, 

• See  pedigree  at  the  end  of  the  chapter. 

. « Note  tliis  Variant  form  of  the  name. 


80 


COlfHEKTARlES  OF 


him  of  his  kingdom  by  force,  he  went  to  that  place  and 
killed  him  with  a orceso,  although  he'was  now  of  an  ad- 
vanced age. 

As  soon  as  tlio  kings  of  Tam  and  Dandargiri  were  informed 
of  the  murder  of  his  uncle  which  had  been  committed  by  Sultan 
Marsusa  they  conspired  against  him,  but  as  he  was  a cavalier 
he  went  up  against  them  and  overcame  them,  #nd  compelled 
them  to  pay  k double  tribute,  and  married  them  with  his  two 
sisters,  and  ho  himself  married  a daughter  of  the  king  of  Fam. 
Those  marriages  produced  great  amity  among  them  all, 
and  by  this  daughter  of  the  king  of  Pam  the  sultan  had  a 
son  who  died  by  poison ; and  afterwards  the  sultan  married 
a daughter  of  his  Lassamane,^  by  whom  he  had  a son  called 
Alaoadin.  On  the  death  of  Sultan  Marsusa,  Sultan  Alaoa- 
dln  became  king  and  married  a daughter  of  tho  king  of 
Campar,  and  this  king  was  so  rich  and  amassed  so  much 
gold  out  of  the  revenues  of  tho  port  of  Malaca,  that  it  was 
estimated  at  a hundred  and  forty  quintals^  of  gold. 

Ho  now  contemplated  his  wealth  and  determined  to  go  to 
the  temple  of  Mdca,  and  made  ready  many  junks  for  the 
passage,  intending  to  cany  with  him  the  king  of  Campar 
and  the  king  of  Dandargiri,  whom  he  kept  in  his  court 
because  they  were  inclined  to  revolt,  no^  permitting  them 
to  return  to  their  own  lands,  and  he  had  become  lord  over 
all  that  land  because  he  was  very  powerful  on  the^sea  and 
very  rich.  And  in  this  king’s  time  Malaca  became  so 
noble  a city  that  it  was  said  to  contain  forty  thousand  in- 
habitants, amongst  whom  were  people  from  *all  parts  of  the 
world.  This  Sultan  Alaoadin  married  a daughter  of  his 

* For  the  signification  of  iihifl  word,  see  next  chapter. 

• The  (quintal  is  equal  to  4 arrobcut*  of  32  an  ateb^  e&eh,  TUearrakl 
contains  2 worccw,  of  eight  onga»  each.  The  quintal  is  rt'preeented  as 
equivalent  to  58.7428  kihgr.j  Fr,  140  quintals  « 8824  kilegr.i  nearly  ; 
that  is,  upwards  of  eight  tons  avoirdupois,  English.  At  £3,  English,  to 
the  ounce,  this  would  amount  to  upwards  of  £860,000. 


AFOKSO  DALBOQPfSBQUK. 


81 


Bendari,  who  had  been  Quelim^  in  the  time  of  his  father, 
whom  he  loved  very  dearly,  and  by  her  he  had  a son  who 
was  called  Sultan  Mahamet,  and  by  the  daughter  of  the 
king  of  Cainpar  he  had  a son  whose  name  was  Sultan 
Celeimao,  and  to  this  latter  the  kingdom  appertained  by 
right,  because  he  came  of  the  lineage  of  the  kings. 

, When  Alaoadin  was  ready  to  sot  out  for  M4ca,  ho  died  of 
poison,  and  it  waa  said  to  have  been  given  to  him  by  the 
intrigues  of  the  kings  of  Pam  and  Dandargiri,  because  he 
tried  to  carry  them  away  against  their  will.  On  the  death 
of  Sultan  Alaoadin,  a great  dissension  arose  in  the  king- 
dom, because  the^daughter  of  the  king  of  Campar,  who  was 
queen,  wished  that  her  son  should  inherit  the  kingdom,  for 
it  belonged  to  him  by  right.  But  the  Bondarti,  who  was 
very  powerful,  and  had  command  of  large  sums  of  money, 
favoured  the  grandson  of  hia  brother  who  had  been  Ben- 
dard  before  him,  and  the  kings  of  Pam  and  Campar 
favoured  the  former.  At  last  the  Bondard  seized  the  king- 
dom for  his  relative ; and  as  soon  as  Sultan  Mahamet  was 
in  possession  of  the  kingdom,  be  threw  off  the  yoke  of  Sifto 
and  Java,  and  submitted  himself  to  the  king  of  China. 

When  the  king  of  SiAo  found  that  the  king  of  Malaca 
would  not  obey  hinf,  he  came  down  against  him  with  a fleet 
of  a hundred  sail.  The  king  of  Malaca  getting  knowledge 
of  this,  dent  his  Lassamane  to  intercept  the  fleet  on  the 
way,  and  the  Lassamane  proceeded  to  wait  for  him  off  the 
island  of  Pulapicfto,*  and  routed  the  whole  of  the  fleet. 
And  from  that  time  until  Afonso  Dalboqnerque  took 
Malaca* — twenty-two  years  after — they  never  came  again. 

> ftThis  word  appoani  to  be  a titular  designation  and  of  Chinese  origin. 

• ? Panjang,  or  Palo,,Panjang  Island,  in^he  Gulf  of  Siam,  9 deg.  9 
min.  K,,  108  deg.  2^  min.  E. 

• Col.  Yule,  in  hia  Second  Edition  of  The  Book  of  Ser  Marco  Poh^ 
gives  the  aubatance  of  the  following  notes  in  vol.  ii,  p.  263,  264,  which 
Ate  necessary  to  understand  this  chapter. 

^Singapura  was  founded  by  an  emigration  from  Paletubang,  itself  A 

VOL.  ni.  * 0 


C01IMSNTAB1B8  Of 


This  king  Sultan  Mahamet  was  very  vain  and  very  proud, 
and  made  a quarrel  with  his  father  for  wishing  to  go  to  the 
temple  of  M4ca,  for  he  used  to  say  that  Malaca  was  the 
right  M^ca;  and,  being  suspicious  of  his  brother,  Sultan 

Jayaneeo  colony.  It  became  the  &ite  of  a flouriBhing  kingdom,  and  was 
then,  according  to  the  traditione  recorded  by  Do  Barros,  the  most  im- 
portant centVeof  population  in  those  regions.  The  Malay  chronology, 
as  published  by  Valentyu  (v,  352),  ascribes  the  foundation  of  Malaca  to 
a king  calle<i  Iskanflar  Shah,  in  a.i>.  1252,  fixes  the  reign  of  Mahomet 
Shah,  third  king  of  Malaca,  and  first  Mussulman  king,  from  a.d.  1276- 
1333,  and  gives  eight  kings  in  all  between  the  foundation  of  the  city 
and  its  capture  by  the  Portuguese  in  a.d.  1511,  a space,  according  to 
those  data,  of  259  years.  As  Sri  Iskandar  Sha^,  the  founder,  had 
reigned  three  years  in  Singapura  before  founding  Malaca,  and  Mahomet 
Shah,  the  loser,  reigned  two  years  in  Johore  after  the  loss  of  his  capital, 
have  264  years  to  divide  among  eight  kings,  giving  thirty-throe  years 
to  each.  This  certainly  indicates  that  the  period  requires  considerable 
curtailment. 

Again,  both  De  Barros  and  these  Commentaries  ascribe  the  foundation 
of  Malaca  to  a Javanese  fugitive  from  Palembdo,  called  Parami9ura, 
and  the  latter  makes  Xaquendarxa  (Iskandar  Shah)  the  son  of  Parami- 
9ura,  and  first  convert  to  Mahomedanism.  Four  other  kings  (sec  pedi- 
gree here  following)  reign  in  succession,  the  last  of  them  being  Sultan 
Mahamet  (Mahomed  Shah),  who  was  expelled  by  Afonso  Dalboquorque 
in  1511. 

The  historian,  De  Couto,  while  giving  the  wme  number  of  reigns 
from  the  conversion  to  the  capture,  places  the  former  about  a.d.  1384. 
And  these  Commentaries  allow  no  more  than  some  ninety  years  from  the 
foundation  of  Malaca  to  the  capture  of  the  city  by  the  Portuguese.  This 
would  place  the  foundation  about  a.d.  1421,  There  is  another  approxi- 
mate check  to  the  chronology,  afforded  by  a Chinese  record  in  Amyot’s 
Collection^  vol.  xiv,  where  we  read  that  Malaca  first  ^s^knowledged  itself 
tributary  to  the  empire  in  1405,  the  king  being  Sih-ju-eul^snla  (?).  In 
A.D.  1411  PeUimisnla  (Parimi^ura)  came  in  person  to  the  Court  of 
ChinB  to  render  homage ; and  in  1414  the  Queen  Mother  of  Malaca 
came  to  the  Court,  bringing  her  son^s  homage.  Now  this  notable  /act 
of  the  risit  of  a king  of^  Malaca  to  the  Cqurt  of  China,  and  his 
acknbwledgment  of  the  Emperor’s  supremacy,  is  allo  recorded  in  these 
Commentaries;  whereifi,  it  is  true,  the  yisit  is  attributed  hot  to  Fariml- 
9ura,  founder  of  Malaca,  but  to  his  son  and  successor  Iskandar  Shah. 
This  may  be  a question  of  title  only,  perhaps  borne  by  both ; but,  we 
seem  entitled  to  oonclude  with  confidence  that  Malaca  was  founded 


AFONSO  DALBOQUEBQUK. 


33 


Geleimao/he  murdered  him  with  a creese,  and  in  like 
manner  he  murderei  seventeen  of  the  principal  men,  all  of 
them  his  relatives,  without  any  cause,  and  even  killed  his 
own  son  and  heir,  because  ho  had  asked  him  for  some 
money  to  spend.  The  Moors,  indeed,  used  to  say  that  it 
was  in  retribution  for  these  crimes  that  Afonso  Dalboquerquo 
deprived  him  of  his  kingdom.  , 

a Prince  whose  son  was  reigning,  and  visited  the  Court  of  China  in 
1411.  And  the  real  chronology  will  be  about  mldw^ay  between  the 
estimate  of  De  Couto  and  of  the  Commntarks ; that  is,  the  commence- 
ment of  the  fifteenth  century. 


PEDIGREE  OF  THE  KINGS  OF  MALAGA, 
Xccording  to  the  “ Cominentancs^\ 


Bataratamurcl,  king  of 
Java. 


pARiMK^UEA,  king  of  Parimi^uri. 
Palimbilo,  and  1st 
king  of  Malaca. 


1 I . 2 

Adau.  of  the  king  of  ^ Xa<^uendarxX,  2nd  ==  A dau.  of  the  kmg  of 
''  ' ' king  of  Malaca.  China’s  Captain. 


Pac6. 


Kajapute.  . 


SULTAX  Modafaixa,  Throo  dans,  married  to 
i 8rd  king  <Jf  Malaca.  ^ Campar, 

Pam,  and  Danuargiri. 


Ad»u  ofthekingW^SuLTAN  Mars.tsa,  A fUu.  of  the  Lnm- 
Para.  i ^th  king  of  Malaca.  ' 


A son,  poisoned. 

A dau.  of  the  king  ol  =F  Suw*"  AtAOAnitf , =r  A dau.  of  the  BendarA 
Campar.  I king  of  Malaca. 


Saltan  CeleimHo.  Scltan  M aham kt, 

eth  and  last  king  of 
Malaca. 


84 


COHMfiNTARlSS  Of 


And  wben  these  men  were  dead^  he  seized  all  tlieir 
property,  amounting  to  about  fifty  quintals  of  gold,  and^ 
took  all  their  wives  and  daughters  to  be  his  concubines — 
about  fifty  women  of  great  price.  Thus  there  were  in 
Malaoa,  from  the  first  king  who  founded  the  city  to  the 
time  of  Sultan  Mahamet,  in  whose  time  Afonso  Dalbo- 
querque  took  it,  six  kings,  that  is  to  say,  Parimi^ura, 
Xaquendarx^i,  Sultan  Modafaixa,  Sultan  Marsusa,  Sultan 
Alaoadim,  Sultan  Mahamet.  And  Malaca  became  so  noble 
that  they  used  to  say,  when'Afonso  Dalboqqerque  took  it, 
that  the  city  and  the  suburbs  contained  about  a hundred 
thousand  inhabitants,  and  extended  a good  league’s  length 
along  the  sea. 


CHAPTER  XVIIL 

Of  the  customs  and  government  of  the  city  of  Malaca. 

This  port  of  Malaca  is  very  safe ; there  are  no  storms  to 
injure  it,  and  never  was  a ship  lost  there.  Jt  forms  a point 
where  some  monsoons  commence  and  others  end,  so  that 
the  inhabitants  of  Malaca  call  those  of  India  people  of  the 
West,  and  the  Javanese,  Chinese,  and  Gores, ^ and  all  other 
of  those  Islanders,  people  of  the  East ; and  Malaqa  is  the 
middle  of  all  this,  a sure  and  speedy  navigation,  such  as 
SingapurA  never  had,  for  in  the  shoals  of  Capacia  many  a 
ship  has  been  lost.  And  those  which  coma  from  the  east 
to  the  west  find  here  western  merchandize,  and  carry  it 
away  with  them,  leaving  that  which  they  bring  of  theirs 
here  instead,  and  in  like  manner  do  they  who  come  from 
the  west.  By  these  means  Malaca  grddui^lly  increased  to 
so  great  an  extent,  that  whereas  the  place  used  once  to  be 
a village  of  Pacd,  Facd-  became  at  length  a village  of 

* Tbese  are  described  farther  on  in  this  chapter. 


Afonso  DALBOOUERQUB. 


85 


litalacft,  for  most  of  the  Moors  of  Pac4  came  thither  to 
nettla. 

Every  year  there  used  to  come  to  Malaca  ships  of  0am- 
baya^  Ohaul,  Dabul,  Calicut,  Adem,  M<5ca,  Xaer,'  JutU/ 
Choramendal,  and  Bengala,  of  the  Chinese,  Gores,  aud 
Javanese,  of  Pegii,  and  all  those  parts.  But  those  of  Siao 
did  not  come  to  Malaca  with  their  merchandize,  because 
they  were  continually  at  war  with  the  Malays.  And  I 
verily  believe,  according  to  mformatioir  which  I have 
obtained  concgming  the  affairs  of  Malaca,  that  if  there 
were  another  world,  and  another  navigable  route,  yet  all 
would  resort  to  the  city,  for  in  her  they  would  find  every 
different  sort  of  drugs  and  spices  which  can  be  mentioned 
in  the  world,  by  reason  of  the  port  of  Malaca  being  more 
commodious  for  all  the  monsoons  from  Cape  Comorim  to 
the  East,  than  any  other  ports  that  exist,  in  those  parts. 
But  I do  not  describe  particularly  the  other  advantages  that 
are  possessed  by  this  port  of  Malaca  on  account  of  the 
monsoons,  which  enable  a navigable  intercourse  to  bo  main- 
tained in  those  parts  independently  of  tlie  shallows  of 
Capaci,^  in  order  that  I may  not  make  too  long  a digression. 

" The  Malays  are  proud  men  by  nature,  and  esteem  them- 
selves highly  for  killing  men  adroitly  witii  stabs  of  the  creese.^ 

1 Xaer^'or  Shehr,  a port  ou  tbe  ooabt  of  Arabia,  between  Adem  and 
l)olar,  14  deg.  44  min.  N.,  49  deg.  40  min.  K. 

• Bluteaa  describes  the  Cm,  or  Cret«e,  the  national  arm  of  the 
Malays,  as  a kind  of  dagger,  with  a flat  blade,  sometimes  undulating  at 
the  sidesi  and  poisoned.  The  poison  is  applied  in  two  ways,  either  by 
stewing  the  weapon  in  the  juice  of  herbs,  aud  so  af>plyijig  the  pdson 
whenever  it  is  required  to  use  it ; or,  by  incorporatiug  the  poison  into  the 
temper  of  the  blade,  in  order  that  the  metal  may  be  thoroughly  imbued 
with  it.  Of  this  latter  kind,  there  are  soifte  specimens  which  coat  as 
much  M a thousan<f pa/acas  (piastres),  for  the  makers  siMiud  much  time 
la  their  manufacture,  using  many  superstitions  and  observing  certain 
; ^eriode  for  the  tempering.  They  strike-  a certain  number  of  blows  on 
: the  month  for  the  forging,  and  soineUroes  the  ceremony 

, i(^  thi*  work  lasts,  with  mysterious  interruptions,  for  more  than  a year. 


86 


C0HMEN1ABIE8  Of 


They  are  malicious,  generally  of  little  truth,  yet  the  Gores 
always  used  to  be  truthful  because  they  held  it  to  be  a high 
honour  that  men  should  trade  with  4hem,  for  they  are  a 
noble  race,  and  one  of  good  customs.  The  Malays  are 
gallant  men,  they  wear  good  clothing,  they  will  not  allow 
anyone  to  put  his  hands  on  their  heads,  nor  on  their 
shoulders.^  All  their  delight  is  in  conversing  about  military 
matters,  and  they  are  very  courteous.  No  one  is  allowed  to 
wear  yellow  colours  under  pain  of  death,  except  only  the 
king  of  the  land,  unless  he  be  a person  to  ijrhom  the  king 
gives  permission  to  do  so  in  order  to  show  him  honour. 
The  Fidalgos,  when  they  speak  to  the  king,  have  to  stand 
oflf  from  him  at  a distance  of  five  or  six  paces. 


In  the  hot  feeason  the  poison  which  is  communicated  by  the  cris  is  bo 
subtle,  that,  from  a light  prick  or  a mere  scratch,  it  reachea  the  heart 
and  kills.  The  only  remedy  is  for  the  wounded  person  immediately — 
comer  do  sen  proprio  esterw, 

Mr.  H.  ISyer  Cuming,  F.S.A.Scot.,  whoso  collection  of  ethnographical 
objects  is  very  extensive,  has  kindly  given  me  the  following  notes  con- 
cerning this  weapon  : — “ I'he  Kris  may  be  regarded  as  the  typical  or 
national  weapon  of  the  Malays  of  Java  and  Sumatra.  It  is  a dagger 
with  a waved  or  serpentine  double-edged  blade,  varying  from  less  than 
eleven  to  full  fourteen  inches  in  length,  and  gradually  widening  from 
the  point  to  the  grip,  where  it  has  a rather  sudden  expansion,  which  is 
always  more  or  less  richly  decorated  on  one  side  with  a perforate 
device.  This  device  occasionally  takes  the  form  of  the  head  of<»  serpent, 
the  body  of  the  reptile  constituting  a sort  of  mid-rib,  running  nearly 
the  whole  length  of  the  blade ; which,  it  is  well  to  state,  is  of  fine 
watered  or  damasked  steel,  and  it  is  a common  pract^e  to  dip  this  blad< 
in  poison  before  going  into  action. 

“ The  hilt,  or  grip,  of  the  kne  has  a singular  curve  or  bend  on  one  side, 
and  is  generally  wrought  of  a beautiful  rich  brown  wood  which  takes  a 
high  polish;  but  ivory  is  sometimes  employed,  grip  is  almost  Oi^n* 
stantly  carved;  the  decorations,  however,  vary  fr^  a few  slight  cuttingfi 
to  elaborate  designs.  " * 

^*The  wooden  sheath  of  the  krU  is  also  of  peculiar  fashion,  having  I 
broad  wing  on  one  aide  to  receive  the  sharp  projecting  portion  of  the 
blade,  and  it  farther  serves  as  a support  to  the  weapon  when  wbln  in 
the  waist-girdle.'* 


Xpomo  DALBOQlTRSQt:!:. 


87 


. The  lords  whdare  adjudged  to  sulfer  penalty  of  death 
hate  the  hoaourablo  privilege  of  dying  by  the  creese,  and 
the^ nearest  relation  of  the  sufierer  is  the  one  who  kills  him. 
If  any  man  of  the'  people  die  without  heirs,  his  property 
goeij  to  the  kihg ; ^nd  no  one  can  marry  without  permission 
from  the  king  or  t^e  Bendard.  If  anyone  take  his  wife  in 
adultery,  he  may  till  within  his  house  both  of  the  parties, 
but  not  otrtside  Sbhe  house,  neither  can  he  kill  the  one 
without  the  other,  but  ho  must  accuse  them  before  the 
judge.  In  the  case  of  a fine  for  injuries;  when  it  has  been 
imposed,  the  kings  used  to  take  half  of  the  money,  and  the 
injured  person  tho  other  half.  In  Malaca  there  wore  divers 
manners  of  adininistering  legal  punishment,  according  to 
the  nature  of  the  crime : some  were  thrust  upon  spits, 
others  struck  forcibly  on  the  breast  some  hanged,  others 
boiled  in  water ; others  roasted  and  given  as  food  to  certain 
men  who  are  like  wild  men,  from  a land  which  is  called 
Dam,  whom  tho  king  brought  to  Malaca  to  eat  those 
condemned  to  this  death.  And  of  every  man  who  dies  at 
the  hands  of  the  law,  the  king  takes  the  half  of  the  pro- 
perty when  there  are  heirs,  and  the  whole  of  it  when  there 
are  ndna 

There  used  to  bo  in  Malaca  five  principal  dig;nitiea.  The 
first  is  Pudricaraja,  which  signifies  Yicoroy,  and  after  the 
king  this  one  is  the  greatest.  The  second  is  Bendard,  who 
is  the  Controller  of  the  Treasury,  and  governs  tho  kingdom. 
Sometimes  tho  Bendara  holds  both  of  these  offices  of  Pudri- 
caraja and  Bendard,  for  two  separato  pei  sous  in  these  two 
offices  never  agree  well  together..  The  third  is  LaHsawane-, 
this  is  Admiral  of  the  Sea.  The  fourth  is  Taimingo,  who  is 
charged  with  the  administration  of^justice  upon  foreigners. 
The  fifth  is  Xatandar ; and  of  these  there  were  four,  one  of 
each  nation — one  of  China,  another  of  Java,  another  of 
Cambayai  another  of  Bongala.  And  all  tho  laijds  were* 

. » Acotovelados  noi  peitos ; lit.,  elbowed,  or  struck  with  the  elbow. 


88  C0HMEKTABIW8  OF  . 

divided  among  these  four  men,  and  ©very  one 
portion,  and  the  Tamungo  was  Judge  of  ihe  Custoin  Bouse, 
over  all  these. 

One  may  well  and  truly  say  that  Malaca,  in  point  of  fact, 
and  merchant  trade,  is  the  most  extensive  place  in  the 
world,  and  her  laws  were  always  very  strictly  obeyed,  and 
the  city  had  need  of  great  persons  to  govern  it,  as  well  in 
the  administration  of  justice  as  also  in  the  management  of 
the  public  properly,  for  it  deserves  this ; butliad  the  city  been 
fairly  well  governed,  Malaca  had  never  ceased  to  bo  as  it 
was  of  old.  Yet  I do  not  speak  here  of  the  numerous  lands, 
islands,  kingdoms,  and  provinces  that  lie  round  these  parts, 
although  I had  certain  information  of  them  in  tbo  letters 
which  I used  to  see  from  Afonso  Dalboquerque  to  the  king, 
D.  Manuel,  wherein  he  gave  him  account  of  all  those  parts 
of  the  world,  for  my  intentions  are  to  write  only  of  the 
labours  and  conquests  of  Afonso  Dalboquerque,  and  all  else 
I leave  to  him  who  will  do  it  better  than  I can.  I will  only 
here  make  mention  of  the  Gores,  as  it  is  necessary  I should 
do  so  for  the  sake  of  this  history. 

As  for  the  Gores,  according  to  the  information  which 
Afonso  Dalboquerque  [obtained]  when  he  took  Malaca — 
although  now  we  have  more  correct  accounts  concerning 
them,  at  that  period  it  was  reported  that  their  province  waa 
on  the  mainland — the  general  opinion  of  all  is  that  tlmirland 
is  an  island,  and  they  navigate  from  it  to  Malaca,  whence 
come  every  year  two  or  three  ships.  The  merchandizes  which 
they  bring  are  silk,  silk-stuffs,  brocades,  porBelain,  a great 
quantity  of  corn,  copper,  rock  alum,  and  frusaena'^  and 
they  bring  a great  deal  of  gold  in  little  cakes,  stamped  with 
the  seal  of  their  king.  It  could  not  be  ascertained  whether 
these  little  cakes  were  the  monby  of  that  Ihnd,  or  whether 
they  impressed  them  with  that  mark  to  show  that  it  was  a 

* Frussma ; gold  or  silver  dust  in  its  native  state,  as  obtained  from 
washings  at  the  river  mouth,  or  in  mines. 


89 


ArOHEO  DALfiOQUKfiQUB. 

tliliilg  wltteh  bad  passed  through  the  port  wheace  they 
brought  it,  for  they  are  men  of  rery  reserved  spoocb,  and 
do  not  give  anyone  an  account  of  their  native  affairs.  This 
gold  cornea  from  an  island  which  is  close  to  theirs ; it  is 
called  Perioco,  and  in  it  there  is  much  gold. 

The  land  of  these  Gores  is  called  I^equea  the  men  are 
fair ; their  dress  is  like  a cloak* -without  a hood ; ,,they  carry 
long  swords  after  the  fashion  of  Turkish  pimetai^s,  but  some- 
what more  narrow ; they  carry  also  daggers  of  two  palms' 
length;  they  are  daring  men  and  feared  in  this  land  [of 
Malaca].  When  they  arrive  at  any  port,  they  do  not  bnng 
out  their  merchandize  all  at  once,  but  little  by  little ; they 
speak  truthfully,  and  will  have  the  truth  spoken  to  thorn. 
If  any  merchant  in  Malaca  broke  his  word,  they  would  im- 
mediately take  him  prisoner.  They  strive  to  dispatch  their 
business  and  get  away  quickly.  They  have  no  settlemont 
in  the  land,  for  they  are  not  the  men  to  like  going  away 
from  their  own  land.  They  set  out  for  Malaca  in  the 
month  of  January,  and  begin  their  return  journey  in 
August  and  September.  The  usual  course  of  their  naviga- 
tion is  to  beat  up  the  channel  between  the  Islands  of  Celate 
and  the  point  of  Singapura,  on  the  side  of  tlio  mainland. 
At  the  time  when-^Afonso  Dalboquerquo  set  sail  for  India, 
after  having  captured  Malaca,  there  had  arrived  two  of  their 
ships  at* the  gate  of  Singapura,  and  they  were  coming  on  to 
Malaca,  but  by  the  advice  of  the  Lassamane,  who  was  the 
king  of  Malaca's  admiral  of  the  sea,  they  remained  where 
they  were,  ancl  would  not  pass  up,  having  learned  that 
Malaca  had  been  taken  by  the  Portuguese ; but  when  the 
governors  of  the  land  were  informed  of  their  position,  they 

I Lew**Cbew,  or  Tboo-Choo,  Islands,  in  the  Chinese  Empire,  26  deg. 
JIO  lain.  N.,  127  deg.  E. 

* BdUindroii ; the  balandrdo  is  an  aftiple  cloak  used  by  several  reh*  * 
giCQS  fraternities  in  Portugal. 


COJfXlNTABIlS  or 


sent  a safefifuard  for  them^  and  a flag  of  trace,  and  then 
they  came  on  immediately. 

Thia  Lassamane  was  a man  of  eighty  years  of  age^  a good 
soldier,  and  of  good  repute  and  great  knowledge  : when  he 
perceived  that  the  king  of  Malaca  was^Jost,  he  went  and 
settled  in  Singapura,  and  after  Afonso  Dalboquerque  was  in 
possession^  of  . Malaca,  he  came  down  to  the  River  of  Muar 
and  sent  to  iek  a s^egaard,  declaring  that  ho  was  desirous 
of  returning  to  Jive  at  Malaca  and  serving  the  king  of 
Portugal.  Afonso*  Dalboquerque  sent  him  the  safeguard ; 
nevertheless  he  would  not  come,  and  it  was  thought  that 
some  of  the  Moors  of  Malaca,  hoping  to  g^in  favours  from 
Afonso  Dalboquerque  and  obtain  the  government  of  the 
land,  had  written  something  to  this  Lassamane,  wherebj 
they  had  prevented  his  coming,  for  they  feared  that  as  he 
was  a man  of  uncommon  capabilities,  Afonso  Dalboquerque 
would  seize  the  opportunity  to  make  use  of  him  for  the 
governing  of  Malaca. 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

Of  the  message  which  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerquo  sent  to  the  king 
of  Malaca,  and  of  the  council  which  he  held  with  his  captains  con<* 
ceruing  the  letter  which  liny  de  Araujo  sent  him.  ,, 

The  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  perceiving  the  pr^de  of 
the  king,  and  the  little  dread  he  had  of  the  Portajpuese 
fleet, — remembering,  too,  the  events  which  hSd  happened  t6 
Diogo  Lopez  de  Sequeira,— became  very  despondent  when 
he  reviewed  the  course  of  this  business,  looking  at  the  falsdis 
hoods  and  deceit  which«the  king  of  MalAca  was.  praotisiiig 
upon  him..  And  cont<emplatin|^  all  )he(^* things,  A^^ 
Dalboquerque  seult  word  how  hA*  had  times  begged 
that  the  Christians  might  Be  eurrendex^^  for  'the  king  hi4 
no  right  to  detain  them  forcibly,  b^ust  they  bed 


91 


AFOVSO  DALBOQ0XSQUS. 

been  taken  prisoners  in  fair  war  nor  by  way  of  reprisals, 
but  rather,  on  the  other  hand,  under  cover  of  his  safeguard 
and  that  of  his  governors ; for  when  they  were  walking  in 
the  city  unarmed,  the  king  had  ordered  them  to  be  put  to 
the  si^^ord  in  the  very  streets  by  any  who  chose  to  kill  them; 
and  although  the  king  had  declared  that  he  had  ordered 
his  Bendark  to  be  put  to  death  because  he*  ha^  been  the 
cause  of  the  murder  of  the  Portuguese,  ydt  he,  Afonso 
Dalboquerque,  had  received  information  that  this  man  had 
been  condemned  to  death  on  account  of  a treasonable 
offenoe,  of  which  he  had  been  guilty,  in  plotting  to  stir  up 
a revolution  against  the  kingdom  ; and  this  was  the  truth, 
for  all  that  the  artful  excuses  about  it  had  for  the  time 
been  accepted,  for  after  the  death  of  the  Bondark,  the  king 
himself  had  given  orders  for  the  Christians  to  be  put  to 
the  torture,  to  the  end  that  they  should  be  compelled  to 
become  Moors,  and  some  among  them,  who  would  not  bear 
their  sufferings,  had  renounced  the  Faith  of  Jesus  Christ 
by  force,  yet  he  had  pretended  to  take  no  notice  of  all 
these  things,  and  put  up  with  them  to  see  whether  it  was 
possible  to  make  a good  peace  and  friendship  with  him.  But 
sinoe  the  king  was  so  obstinate  as  to  desire  no  kind  of  ter- 
mination to  this  business,  he,  Afonso  Dalboquerque,  would 
have  him  to  know  that  none  of  the  men  in  the  fleet  could 
bear  td  stay  there  day  after  day,  without  having  wreaked 
them  vengeance  upon  the  treason  which  had  been  done 
in  titet  city  towards  the  captain  and  soldiers  of  the  king 
jqf  Portugal,  Aom  the  king  of  Malaca  had  ordered  treason- 
ably to  be  put  to  death. 

^ Along  Fftk  this  communication  which  Afonso  Dalbo- 
^etque  sent  to  the  king  of  Malaca,  he  also  wrote  a letter 
to’i^iiy  de  Arsujo^'wberein  he  said  how  well  aware  he  was  of 
Ms  obiigafciofli  and^iIlat  of  the  captains  and  all  the  rest  of 
4e  foreea  in  4e  for  the  service  of  the  king  D. 

Madiiel^  his  lord,  aad  much  more  so  in  a war  so  just  wherein 


OOKlfSKYiLBIta  or 


he  had  frequently  justified  himself;  but  that  the  kingbf 
Malaoa  had  apparently  obstinately  made  up  his  mind  neither 
to  deliver  up  the  Christians  nor  to  receive  the  peace  and 
friendship  which  were  ofiered  to  him  on  the  part  of  the  king 
of  Portugal^  for  which  reasons  it  was  advisable  to  laj*  hold 
upon  him,  Buy  de  Araujo,  without  any  further  delay ; but 
if  this  state  of  affairs  shouki  grow  more  serious,  they  must 
put  up  with  their  hardships  and  bear  them  with  patience, 
for  he  on  his  part  was  bound,  insomuch  as  it  was  to  the 
advantage  of  the  king  of  Portugal’s  estate,  to  make  an 
end  of  this  business  and  match  his  forces  against  those  of 
the  enemy,  and  the  longer  he  delayed,  the  more  time  they 
had  for  fortifying  themselves. 

Buy  de  Araujo  replied,  God  grant  that  neither  the  fleet 
of  the  king  of  Portugal,  nor  his  Portuguese  themselves, 
should  receive  any  affront  or  discomfiture  in  order  to  make 
his  life  secure,  for  he  was  also  on  his  part  bound  to  die  for 
the  service  of  God  and  of  his  king,  and  for  the  liberty  of 
his  countrymen,  and  he  held  it  to  be  a good  fortune  for  him 
that  Our  Lord  had  placed  him  in  a State  where  he  could  die 
for  his  Holy  Faith  ; and,  as  for  himself  and  his  companions, 
he  should  not  fail  to  do  what  was  best  for  the  service  of  the 
king  of  Portugal,  for  they  were  now  quite  resigned  to  any- 
thing that  would  happen  to  them ; and  he  would  have 
Afonso  Dalboquerque  to  know  that  the  king  of 'Malaca 
was  making  ready  as  fast  as  was  possible,  and  that  it  was 
the  Guzaratea  who  were  at  work  day  and  night  upon  the 
fortification  of  the  stockades,  for  these  were  the  principal 
people  who  could  not  bear  that  the  Portuguese  should  getl^ 
footing  in  the  land ; and  if  the  Portuguese  attack  upon  the 
city  should  be4ecidid  wpon,  jt  ought  to  be  put  into  etecu- 
tion  as  quickly  «b  Should  be,  without  wasting  any  more  time 
in  discussing  the  of  agreement,  or  making  deman^ 
for  the  surrender  of  the  Christians;  for  he  must  iknow  for 
certain  that  the  king  would  not  restore  them  to  the 


AfONSO  DAIBOQUIEQUB.  9^ 

except  under  compulsion ; and  he  was  now  becoino 
so  puffed  up  with  pndo  when  ho  surveyed  the  great  number 
of  foreign  soldiers  that  he  had,  that  he  thought  of  nothing 
less  than  actually  capturing  the  Portuguese  fleet. 

On  receiving  this  reply  from  Ruy  de  Araujo,  Afonso 
Dalboquerque  summoned  a meeting  of  all  his  captains  on 
board  of  his  own  ship,  and  gave>them  an  account  of  all  this 
which  was  contained  in  the  letter,  and  seeing  t^at  the  king 
of  Malaca  was  fixed  in  this  determination,*  he  desired  them 
to  declare  to  him  whether  an  immediate  attack  should  be 
made  upon  the  city,  or  a further  exchange  of  complimentary 
negotiations  be  carried^  on.  The  captains  replied  to  him, 
that  for  days  past  they  had  not  thought  it  right  for  him  to 
be  so  long-suffering  towards  the  king ; for  since  the  very 
day  of  their  arrival,  the  replies  of  the  enemy  had  always 
clearly  indicated  that  they  did  not  desire  to  come  to  any 
understanding  or  friendship  with  them,  and  all  these  delays 
which  had  been  sot  up  were  to  enable  them  to  make  their 
preparations  and  fortify  themselves,  as  Huy  de  Araujo  had 
indeed  often  declared  in-his  communications. 


CHAPTER  XX. 

Of  the  requitttiem  which  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  ordered  to  be 
made  to  the  king,  signed  by  himself  and  all  the  captabs ; and  how 
the  king  sent  him  Ruy  de  Araujo  and  his  companions  whom  he  had 
there.  • 

^Notwithstanding  the  above-mentioned  opinion  of  the 
detains,  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  thought  right,  for 
the  better  qualification  of  these  proceedings  in  the  sight  of 
0od,  and  of  the  kings  of  air  that  land  (that  they  should  not 
Bay  the  Portuguese  were  tyrants)  that  he  should  first  of  all 
otdet  a final  aud  formal  demand  to  be  drawn  up,  end  signed 
by  biw  and  by  all  the  captains,  aud  after  this  certain  im- 


94 


COHHINtABtSS  Of 


provised  attacks  with  a show  of  battle ; and  this  demand 
was  forthwith  forwarded  to  the  king  of  Malaoa  by  the  hands 
of  a Moor,  who  was  employed  in  going  backwards  and 
forwards  with  these  negotiations. 

The  substance  of  the  communication  was  to  the  effect  that 
the  king  D.  Manuel,  his  lord,  had  sent  to  the  port  of 
Malaoa  a captain,  with  certain  ships,  which  came  bearing 
more  of  merdhandize  than  of  men,  out  of  a desire  which  he 
had  of  establishing  peace  and  friendship  with  him ; but,  in 
violation  of  the  safeguard  which  both  the  king  and  his 
Bendard  had  granted  to  this  captain,  they  had  notwith- 
standing stolen  all  the  property  and  murdered  or  im- 
prisoned the  Portuguese — as  had  already  ^een  the  subject 
of  complaint— and  laboured  as  much  ss  they  possibly  could 
to  seize  his  ships,  but  miraculously  Our  Lord  had  delivered 
them  from  their  hands,  the  king  of  Malaca  should  therefore 
know  for  certain  that  unless  orders  were  issued  for  the 
immediate  release  of  the  Christians  and  restitution  of  the 
property  which  had  been  captured  in  the  ships,  that  he 
(Afonso  Dalboquorque)  would  certainly  destroy  him,  and 
take  his  city  away  frJm  him,  and  he  held  God  to  be  judge 
between  them  that  he  and  his  governors  were  the  cause  of 
their  own  destruction ; for,  by  following*  the  advice  of  the 
Guzarates — deadly  enemies  to  the  Portuguese — he  (the  king 
of  Malaca)  would  not  take  any  steps  towards  ooifcludihg 
terms  of  peace  with  him  ; and,  as  for  the  present  fleet  which 
he  had  now  with  him,  it  had  no  thoughts  about  the  mon- 
soon— as  the  Guzarates  had  pretended  to  th/ king— neither 
was  it  losing  any  season  of  voyage ; nor  was  it  searching 
for  a cargo ; for  the  ships  of  which  it  was  composed  belong^ 
to  the  fleet  which  the^king  of  Portugal  employed  for  the 
government  of  India,  and  it  was  of  no  oonsequenoe  to  them* 
whether  they  remained  one  year  or  ten  in  that  ha^bomrl 
and  the  king  of  Malaca  should  rest  quite  sure  that  unleiis 
he  gave  np  all  thoughts  of  prosecuting  the  war  whicjl  he 


AfONSO  DALBOQtJSBaUE. 


95 


wished  to  make  upon  the  captains  and  men  of  the  king  of 
Portugal,  he  would  very  soon  lose  his  estate;  and,  as  a 
material  sign  of  all  these  things  being  in  this  position, 
Afonso  Dalboquerque  gave  this  token,  that  ho  shifted  a ring 
he  wore  from  one  finger  to  another ; which  he  did  forthwith 
in  presence  of  his  messenger,  who  took  this  declaration  to 
the  king.  « 

And  the  king  of  Malaca  lost  no  time  in^sending  the 
messenger  back  again  to  declare  that  bis.  heart  was  good 
and  sound,  and  he  did  not  remember  about  lluy  de  Araujo 
and  his  Christians;  that  the, reason  of  not  sending  them 
was  that  he  was  having  some  clothing  made  for  them ; and 
that  he  desired  Afonso  Dalboquerque  would  order  his  ships 
to  withdraw  from  right  in  front  of  the  port,  in  order  that 
there  might  not  arise  any  disputes  between  the  Christians 
and  the  Moors,  who  had  their  ships  there. 

Therefore,  although  Afonso  Dalboquerque  was  well  aware 
that  this  was  only  an  artifice  of  the  king,  nevertheless,  in 
order  not  to  give  him  an  opportunity  of  taking  hold  of  any- 
thing for  future  complaint,  ho  ordered  the  small  vessels  to 
withdraw  and  lie  off  outside  the  port*  aud  told  the  Moor, 
his  messenger,  that  he  was  waiting  for  lluy  de  Araujo  and 
his  companions,  a«d  unless  they  were  returned  to  him 
immediately,  he  should  not  trouble  himself  with  any  further 
parley  or  communications.  The  Moor  went  back  with  this 
message,  and  six  days  passed  away  without  his  returning 
with  any  reply  to  this.  Afonso  Dalboquorquo,  seeing  this 
delay,  would  not  wait  any  longer,  and  sent  ten  boats,  with 
armed  men  in  them,  to  sot  fire  to  some  houses  which  stood 
close  to  the  edge  of  the  shore ; and  to  burn  the  ships  of  the  1 
Guzarates,  in  order  that  they  should  lose  all  hope  of  re- 1 
turning  to  their  land  so  sodn  with  a cargo,  because  they 
had  taken  so  much  trouble  to  prevent  the  settlement  of 
differences  between  him  and  the  king  of  Malaca;  and  to 

hum  also  all  the  other  ships  that  lay  in  the  port,  except 

• 


$6  COMMBNTAMBS  OF 

only  ihose  whioh  came  from  ports  to  the  east  of  the  (fepe  of 
Ootoorim,  if  they  belonged  to  Hindoos.  • 

When  these  boats  reached  the  houses  they  set  them  on 
fire  immediately,  and  did  the  same  to  the  ships,  The 
kipg,  now  having  experienced  the  determination  of  Afonso 
Dalboquerque,  lost  no  time  in  sending  back  Ruy  de  Aranjo 
and  the  Christians,  and  witk  them  a Moor  to  treat  for  terms 
of  peace,  asking  him  to  send  back  detailed  statements  of  his 
complaints,  and  he  would  do  whatever  was  desired  of  him. 

“ But  although  Afonso  Dalboquerque  knew  very  well  that 
this  would  not  produce  any  effect,  nevertheless  he  sent  back 
certain  statements  of  his  demands,  and  told  the  Moor  to 
declare  to  the  king  that  these  were  the  conditions  on 
which  only  he  would  make  peace  and  establish  himself  in 
the  land. 

The  king  considered  the  articles,  and  conceded  those  of 
which  Afonso  Dalboquerque  was  most  doubtful  (which  did 
not  seem  to  him  to  be  a good  sign),  viz.,  that  he  would 
agree  to  grant  a site  in  the  city  on  which  to  erect  a 
fortress,  and  would  pay  in  ready  money  for  everything  that 
had  been  taken  froli  Diogo  Lopez  de  Sequeira.  Afonso 
Dalboquerque,  employing  artifices  also  on  his  side  against 
the  king,  replied  that  although  he  attached  greater  im- 
portance to  the  other  articles  which  he  had  sent  than  to 
those  which  the  king  had  conceded,  nevertheless  be  would 
consent  to  accept  these  concessions,  that  it  might  not  be 
said  that  he  was  a hard  man  to  please. 

To  this  reply  no  answer  was  ever  sent  Ibaok  from  the 
king,  but  some  Moorish  spies  came  disguised  like  merchants, 
and  brought  for  sale  musk,  chickens,  and  other  things ; and 
at  other  times  there  came  the  Moor  who  had  been  em* 
ployed  to  convey  the  communications  between  the  king  and 
the  Fortugueae,  discoursing  of  matters  which  were  nothing 
to  the  purpose.  Ho  pretended  that  he  came  to  apprise 
Afonso  Dtdboqnerque  of  many  junks  that  were  approaching 


AFONSO  DALBOQUERQUK. 


97 


from  varioQS  parts,  armed  and  with  forces  on  board  favour- 
able to  the  king  of  Malaca^  and  of  the  great  preparations  for 
war  that  they  carried.  And  when  the  Moor  went  off,  there 
came  out  of  the  river  a number  of  armed  ^ardos  making 
show  of  desiring  to  come  to  combat  with  our  fleet ; yet  with 
all  this,  Afonso  Dalboquerqae  boro  with  it  for  some  days, 
to  see  if  they  desired  to  follow  good  advice.  JBut  when  he 
saw  their  stockades  bedecked  with  flags,  and  everything 
arranged  in  order  of  battle,  and  that  the  king,  being  a 
tyrant  who  was  anxious  to  keep  up  his  position  at  all  risks, 
and  spending  a great  deal  of  his  treasure  to  keep  up  his 
power,  and  to  maintain  it,  was  so  blind  that  he  did  not  see 
the  danger  that  ffe  ran  of  losing  his  kingdom,  he  considered 
with  himself  that  this  was  a judgment  that  had  come  upon 
the  king,  and  that  Our  Lord  desired  to  make  an  end  of  him 
for  good  and  all,  and  to  oast  the  Moors,  and  the  very  name 
of  Mafamede,  out  of  the  land,  and  to  have  his  Gospel 
preached  in  those  regions,  and  their  mosques  transformed 
into  houses  of  God’s  praise  by  means  of  the  king  D.  Manuel 
and  by  the  labours  of  his  subjects,  so  he  gave  orders  for  an 
attack  with  armed  boats  and  two  barges  with  heavy  bom- 
bards, with  the  object  of  viewing  tho  men  who  rallied  at 
the  alarm,  and  seeing  where  they  had  stationed  their  ar- 
tillery, and  how  they  managed  their  defence. 


CHAPTER  XXL 

How  the  Chinese  merchants,  who  were  at  Malaca,  made  their  way  to 
Jhe  great  Afonso  Dalbo<iuerque ; and  of  what  paased  with  him ; 
and  of  the  council  which  he  held  with  t^e  Captains,  Fidalgos,  and 
Cavaliers  of  the  Fliiet  to  attack,the  city. 

Among  the  foreign  ships  which  were  in  tho  port  of 
Malaca,  to  which  Afonso  Dalboqudrque  would  not  have  any 
injury  done  when  he  ordered  those  of  the  Guzarates  to  be 


COMMKNTAItIBS  Of 


burned^  were  fire  Chinese  janks,  whose  captains  and  crews 
the  king  of  Malaoa  had  detained  for  some  days  pastj  intend- 
ing to  avail  himaolf  of  them  against  the  king  of  Darn,  with 
whom  he  was  at  war,  and  this  was  their  condition  when 
Afonso  Dalboquerque  arrived  with  his  fleet.  But  the  king 
of  Malaca,  confident  that  the  Chinese  would  never  dare  to 
fly  away  for  fear  of  the  Ponfcngaese  in  the  port,  and  also  be- 
cause he  had  quite  enough  to  do  to  look  after  himself  and 
his  country,  ceased  to  think  about  thorn . 

When  the  Chineso  perceived  that  they  had  greater  free^ 
dom  than  before,  they  sought  a means  of  escape,  and 
gathered  themselves  together  in  their  junks.  The  crews, 
who  wore  left  on  land,  seeing  their  captains  in  safety,  a few 
at  a time,  each  one  as  best  he  might,  made  their  way  to 
them,  and  those  captains,  when  they  had  reassembled  theii 
men,  being  thoroughly  indignant  against  the  king  for  the 
robbery  and  tyranny  which  ho  had  exercised  upon  them  in 
respect  of  their  merchandise,  and  also  in  order  to  obtain 
security  for  themselves,  came  and  offered  themselves  tc 
Afonso  Dalboquerque  with  their  crews  and  ships,  to  help 
him  in  his  war. 

He  thanked  them  very  much  for  their  offers  of  help,  bul 
would  not  accept  any  assistance  from  them  except  the  bar 
quos^  of  their  junks,  to  be  used  for  disembarking  his  mei 
on  land,  for  should  their  business  not  succeed  in  tko  way  h< 
hoped  in  Our  Lord  that  it  would,  if  the  Chinese  were  ii 
opposition  to  the  king  of  Malaca  in  the  matter,  they  migh 
hereafter  be  ill  treated  by  the  king  for  the  part  they  ha< 
taken. 

The  Chinese  replied,  that  seeing  he  would  not  aqpep 
their  services,  they  begged  him  very  much  of  his  kindnes 
to  grant  them  permission  to  go  away  to  their  own  lan^ 
and  wherever  they  might  encounter  Portuguese,  thos 
should  bo  ever  remembered  for  the  favour  he  had  don 
* Barcas, 


AFONSO  OALBOQUKKQUU,  9y 

ttieifa  in  letting  them  depart  at  liberty  and  get  away  from 
8Qoh  a bad  set  of  people  as  the  Malays  were ; and  if  Malaca 
should  fall  into  his  power,  they  would  undertake  that  every 
year  more  than  one  hundred  junks  should  come  there  with 
great  quantity  of  merchandise ; and  with  very  courteous 
words  they  told  him  to  take  very  good  advice  before  lie 
attacked  the  city,  for  there  weVe  inside  it  moro^than  twenty 
thousand  fighting  men,  Javanese,  Persians,  and  Coracjones, 
men  in  whom  the  king  reposed  the  gi'eatest  confidence; 
while  of  the  natives,  the  king  bould  have  as  many  soldiers 
as  he  wished ; and  he  had  twenty  war  elephants,  with  their 
castles  well  armed,  and  plenty  of  artillery  and  arras  of  every 
kind,  which  the  Guzarates  had  brought  for  him  from  Cara- 
baya,  and  as  for  all  other  things  necessary  for  the  war,  he 
was  not  in  need  of  anything ; and  unless  the  city  v/ere  taken 
by  starvation  (thongh  the  inhabitants  hud  provided  even 
for  this  contingency),  by  stopping  the  supplies  which  came 
to  her  from  Jaoa,  they  thought  it  very  doubtful  if  any 
victory  could  be  obtained  against  her ; therefore  they  told 
him  this,  because  they  would  bo  very  sorry  to  see  him  in 
any  peril, 

Afonso  Dalboquerque  told  them  that. ho  thanked  them 
very  much  for  their  advice,  but  he  was  already  quite  de- 
termined to  undertake  the  matter;  and  oven  if  the  king  of 
Malaotf^s  power  were  great,  still  greater  was  the  power  of 
God,  for  whose  faith  they  were  fighting ; that  he  begged  they 
would  stay  the^e  a few  more  days  to  see  what  end  came  to 
Malaca,  and  then  carry  news  to  the  king  of  China  of  all  that 
might  take  place ; and  he  would  send  them  a galley  in 
which  they  could  be  drawn  up  close  by  the  place  of  disem- 
barkation, so  as^  to  see  the  great  spirit  with  which  the 
Portuguese  would  attack  the  city,  and  their  manner  of 
fighting.  The  Chinese  did  as  Afonso  Dalboquerque  ordered, 
aod>  with  great  oonceru  that  he  would  not  have  them  serve 
/him  in  that  enterprise,  went  away  to  their  ships  and  sent 
him  the  barques. 


100 


COMMENTABIV8  07 


Ab  soon  as  the  Chinese  had  gone  awaj,  Afonso  Da}bo- 
querqne  summoned  a meeting  of  all  the  captains,  fidalgos^ 
and  noble  persons  of  the  fleet,  and  recounted  what  had 
passed  between  him  and  the  Chinese,  and  told  them  how 
much  he  took  it  to  heart  that  these  Chinese  had  declared 
to  him  that  they  looked  upon  the  impending  undertaking 
as  of  doubtful  result,  and,  in  order  to  get  over  his  affront, 
he  had  made  uj^  his  mind  to  attack  the  city  before  they  set 
out  for  China,  and*  erect  therein  a fortress  of  convenient 
dimensions,  with  determination  to  maintain  it,  for  this  was 
what  would  conduce  most  to  the  service  of  the  king  their 
Lord;  because,  if  they  did  not  accomplish  this,  it  was  of 
little  profit  to  stake  very  much  upon  the  chance  of  capturing 
the  city,  seeing  that  Malaca  was  the  principal  seaport  of  the 
whole  world,  and  thither  resorted  Moors  from  all  parts  in 
search  for  spiceries,  especially  from  Cairo  and  Mdoa;  as 
well  as  all  the  inhabitants  of  places  to  the  eastward  of  the 
gates  of  the  Straits.  And  these  Malays  were  the  people  who 
did  the  most  harm  to  the  trade  of  India,  so  much  so  that  the 
ships  of  Portugal,  that  were  thither  bound,  ran  great  risk  of 
being  lost,  unless  it  were  a fleet  of  very  large  numbers, 
well  provided  with  men  and  munitions  of  war.  At  all  these 
things  he  begged  them  to  look,  and  telhhim,  when  their 
minds  were  quite  made  up,  what  they  would  have  him  do ; 
because,  if  they  did  not  consider  it  advisable  to  construct  a 
fortress,  he  would  not  jeopardise  the  life  of  a single  cabin- 
boy  for  all  the  Moors  that  there  were  in  Malaca. 

The  captains,  after  many  debates  held  concerning  this 
matter,  declared  to  him  that  they  did  not  doubt  that  the 
service  of  the  king  would  be  furthered  by  their  constructing 
a fortress  in  Malaca,  with  a view  of  securing  the  commerce 
of  those  parts,  but  the  business  would  have  to  be  under- 
taken  when  he  had  everything  ready  that  was  required,  so 
th^^  could  accomplish  it^in  a short  space  of  time  ; and 
tbit  his  plan  should  be  to  attack  the  city  and  inflict  a 


AFONSO  DALBOQUEEQUS. 


lOl 


^ 1^^  upoUi  the  Inng  for  hia  misdeeds^  and  overcowo 
that  pride  which  he  had  manifested;  and,  if  after  the 
capture  of  the  c\ty,  the  necessary  materials  for  the  construc- 
tion of  the  fortress  could  be  got  together,  they  then  could 
make  it,  provided  that  they  did  not  let  the  proper  time 
slip  away  for  their  returning  to  the  assistance  of  India 
Afonso  Dalboquerque  approved  of  this  opinion  which  the 
captains  had  arrived  at,  and  dismissed  them  to  their  ships 
to  make  ready  against  the  time  when  he  should  let  them 
knof/  the  day  be  had  selected  for  the  attack  upon  the  city. 


CHAPTER  XXII. 

How  the  great  Afonao  Dalboquerque,  on  the  morning  of  St.  JamoaN 
day,  attacked  tho  city  of  Malaca,  and  what  passed  thereupon. 

.•'iv' 

The  great  Afonso  DalboqifOrque  was  so  devoted  to  the 
Apostle  St.  James,  that  after  it  had  been  agreed  by  all  that 
the  city  should  be  attacked,  he  delayed  the  completion  ol 
his  preparations  for  some  days,  with  tho  object  of  putting 
his  h^nds  to  this  work  on  that  saint^s  day,  for  he  trusted 
that  through  the  prayers  and  merits  of  the  saint.  Our  Lord 
would  gpve  them  victory  over  it,  as  He  had  done  in  the 
capture  of  Goa.  And  when  the  time  was  come,  he  sum^ 
moned  the  captains  and  declared  to  them  that  ho  was 
determined  to  attack  the  city  upon  the  following  day,  which 
was  the  day  o&  the  Apostle  Saint  James,  and  it  was  neces- 
sary, before  doing  so,  to  discuss  where  and  in  what  order 
they  must  disembark,  in  order  that  every  one  should  know 
what  duty  was  assigned  to  him. 

The  captains  i)egan  to  giye  their  opinions,  but  as  there 
were  various  opinions  among  them,  so  that  some  said  the 
attack  should  be  made  on  one^side  and  others  on  the  other, 
Afonso  Dalboquerque  desired,  before  any  final  decision 
shotdd  be  made,  that.  Ruy  de  Araujo,  who  had  consider- 


102  COMMENTARIES  OF 

able  experience  concerning  the  land/  jBhonld  give  hit 
opinion* 

Ruy  do  Araujo  declared  that  in  hia  opinion  they  ought 
first  to  attack  the  bridge  before  anything  else,  for  if  they 
took  that  and  made  themselves  strong  in  it,  our  people 
would  be  placed  just  between  the  city  and  the  inhabitants 
of  Upe,  and  the*  power  of  the»king  divided  into  two  parts ; 
for  one  could  nOt  render  any  assistance  to  the  other  except 
by  means  of  the  bridge,  which  one  hundred  men,  with  small 
barricades  that  they  could  set  up  in  it,  could  defend  against 
every  forcible  attempt  of  the  Moors  that  might  be  made ; 
but  if  the  attack  upon  the  city  were  made  at  any  other 
parts,  as  some  of  the  Lords  who  were  there  present  advised, 
Malaca  was  of  such  a size  and  possessed  so  many  fighting 
tnen  in  her  population,  that  he,  for  his  part,  held  the  matter 
as  very  doubtful  of  success,  and  all  would  run  a risk  of 
being  lost. 

Without  listening  to  any  further  advice,  as  soon  as  Afonso 
Dalboquerque  had  heard  Ruy  de  Araujo*  s words,  he  agreed 
with  the  opinion  he  gave,  and  immediately  gave  orders  that 
the  captains,  with  their  men  in  two  battalions,  should  pro- 
ceed to  attack  the  bridge.  D.  Jo&o  de  Lima,  Caspar  d^ 
Paiva,  FernJto  Perez  Dandrade,  Sebastififo  de  Miranda, 
Fernao  Gomez  de  Lem  os,  Vasco  Fernandez  Coutinho,  and 
James  Teixeira,  with  other  fidalgos  and  soldiers  of  the*  fleet, 
to  disembark  on  the  side  of  the  mosque ; while  he  himself, 
with  Duarte  da  Silva,  Jorge  Runes  de  Lifto,  Simfto  Dan- 
drade, Aires  Pereira,  Jofto  de  Sousa,  Antonio  Dabreu, 
Pero  Dalpoem,  Dinis  Fernandez  de  Melo,  Sim&o  Martinz, 
Simfto  Afonso,  and  Nuno  Yaz  de  Castelo-branco,  with  all 
the  rest  of  the  armed  forces,  would  disembark  on  the  city 
side;  and  after  an  entiy  had  been  effected  through  the 
stockades,  one  and  all  were  to  rush  on  towards  the  middle 

^ Compare  this  with  what  is  written  of  Ruy  de  Araujo  at  the  end  of 
chapter  xxir,  p.  111.  ' 


AFONSO  OALBOQUKRQUE. 


103 


Of  the  bridge,  until  thojr  could  estimate  the  strength  of  the 
enemy  and  in  what  direction  their  spirit  led  them,  for  in 
an  affair  of  which  they  had  not  yet  seen  the  result,  he 
could  not  come  to  any  other  determination  than  ordering 
this  only,  that  where  they  saw  his  flag  flying,  there  all 
should  concentrate  themselves. 

Having  given  these  orderl,  ho  dismissed  the  captains  to 
go  and  get  ready,  and  on  the  following  day,  when  they  heard 
a trumpet  sounded,  come  on  board  hirf  ship  so  as  to  set 
forth  therefrom. 

Two  hours  before  the  break  of  day  Afonso  Dalboquerque 
ordered  the  truqpet  to  bo  blown,  in  order  to  awaken  them 
and  they  embarked  immediately  with  all  the  rest  of  the 
men-at-arms  and  went  on  board  his  ship,  and  when  a 
general  confession  had  been  made,  all  set  out  together  and 
came  to  the  mouth  of  the  river  just  as  morning  broke,  and 
attacked  the  bridge,  each  battalion  in  the  order  which  had 
been  assigned  to  it. 

Then  the  Moors  began  to  firo  upon  them  with  their  artil- 
lery, which  was  posted  in  the  stockades,  and  with  thoii 
largo  matchlocks^  wounded  some  of  our  men. 

#As  soon  as  the  first  fury  of  their  artillery  was  spent,  the 
great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  gave  order  for  the  trumpets  to 
be  blown,  and  with  a war-cry  of  Sanctingo'^  Saint 

JameV',  they  all,  with  one  accord,  foil  upon  the  stockades 
of  the  bridge,  each  battalion  in  its  proper  place,  and  frotn 
on  this  side  an^  on  that  an  infinite  number  of  Moors  rushed 
up,  some  with  bows  and  arrows,  and  others  with  long  lances, 
and  shields  like  those  of  Biscay,  blowing  their  horns®  and 
trumpets,  and  for  a good  space  of  time  they  fought  very 
bravely,  and  d^endod  the  stockades ; but  our  men,  who 
bad  disembarked  on  the  side  of  the  mosque,  by  dint  of  arms 

' Espingarddes ; the  espingnrdJo  probably  a large  kind  of  eipin- 
garda^  or  matchlock,  a word  of  frequent  use  throughout  the  text  of  th< 
Cmmentariet.  * Anafa, 


104 


COMMSKTABIIS  07 


forced  tbeir  way  through  them  aud  at  this  very  moment 
the  king  of  Malaca  came  up  mounted  upon  an  elephant|  and 
his  son  upon  another,  with  a body  of  armo^  men,  and  ele- 
phants armed  with  wooden  castles,  containing  many  war- 
like engines,  and  compelled  the  Moors  to  return  to  the 
stockades  which  they  had  deserted. 

D.  Jofto  de  Lima,  Pernio  Perez  Dandrade,  aud  all  the 
others  who  were  in  that  company  were  inspired  with  fresh 
vigour  at  the  sight  of  the  king,  and  without  any  fear 
of  his  elephants  attacked  the  Moors  in  so  spirited  a 
manner,  that  they  got  possession  of  tho  mosque  imme- 
diately. Afonso  Dalboquerque,  who  remaij;ied  on  the  side 
nearest  to  the  city  with  all  the  other  captains  and  men, 
attacked  the  bridge  on  that  side,  and  although  his  divi- 
sion met  with  great  resistance  by  reason  of  the  presence 
there  of  a large  part  of  the  force  which  had  accom- 
panied the  king,  very  well  armed,  many  of  them  with  bows, 
others  carrying  blowing  tubes*  with  poisoned  arrows, 
wherewith  they  wounded  a great  many  of  his  men,  never- 
theless anxiously  emulating  the  captains  of  the  other  bat- 
talion who  had  by  this  time  become  masters  of  the  mosque 
and  tho  head  of  tho  bridge,  they  fell  upon  the  Moors  |p 
bravely  that  they  got  into  their  stockades  By  force  of  arras, 
aud  killed  many  of  them,  and  put  them  to  flight.  On  our 
side  many  were  wounded,  and  some  died  of  tho  poftioned 
arrows. 

* ’ ......  € defendkam  as  estancias;  mas  os  nossos^  pe  eram  daquella 

handa  da  mesqtiita^  por  for^a  darmas  os  entrdram;  there  is  probably  a 
typographical  error  in  the  latter  part  of  this  extract,  for  the  ot  before 
entrdram  refers  to  estancias^  and  should  be  to  agree  with  this  word.  ^ 

* ZarvaUinas  com  seias  ervadas;  this  word  is  also  written  Sarahatam^ 
and  Zaravatana^  by  Vioyra,  who  calls  it  ^^a  sort  of  speaking  trampet'’. 


AF017SO  BALBOQUCEQUB. 


100 


CHAPTER  XXIIL 

How  Tuao  Bandao,  captain  of  the  king  of  Malaca,  perceiving  the  dif;- 
person  of  the  Moora,  went  to  their  aasistance  with  a body  ot 
soldiers,  and  what  passed  thereupon;  and  how  the  king  took  to 
flight,  and  our  men  pursued  hipi. 

No  sooner  did  Tuao  Banddo,  captain  of  the  king  of 
Malaca^  who  held  a stockade  on  the  bridge^  bedecked  with 
flags  of  bis  colours^  perceive  the  discomfiture  of  the  Moors, 
than  he  sallied  out  with  seven  hundred  Javanese,  and  other 
two  captains  with  him,  and  went  to  reinforce  the  bridge  ou 
the  city  side,  with  the  intention  of  falling  on  our  men  in  the 
rear.  When  Afonso  Dalboquerque  caught  sight  of  them 
coming  along  one  of  the  principal  streets  of  the  city,  he  dis- 
patched from  his  company  Joao  de  Sousa,  Antonio  Dabreu, 
and  Aires  Pereira  in  command  of  their  men,  with  orders  to 
fall  upon  the  advancing  body,  and  this  they  did  so  rapidly, 
that  before  the  Moors  could  get  up  as  far  as  the  stockades, 
they  fell  upon  them  with  the  lance  with  such  impetuosity 
that  they  made  them  turn  and  fly. 

^D.  Jofto  de  Lima,  and  other  captains  who  wore  on  tho 
side  of  the  mos^ne,  when  they  saw  these  Moors,  ran  up  to 
attack  them  in  front,  and  there  and  then  killed  several  of 
ibe  bbdy.  The  others,  perceiving  thbmselves  cut  off  in 
front  and  in  roar,  all  threw  themselves  into  tho  sea.  And 
the  mariners,  jvho  were  in  the  boats,  came  up  without  a ^ 
moment^s  delay  and  put  them  all  to  death,  so  that  not  a 
single  man  was  left,  their  captain,  Tuflo  Bandao,  being 
already  dead,  as  well  as  tho  two  captains  who  had  set  out 
with  him } and^whon  they  had  accomplished  this  business 
they  went  back  to  the  stockades* 

D.  Jofto  de  Lima,  and  the  others  who  formed  his  company, 
aaoing,  after  they  had  established  thomsolvos  in  the  stock- 
l^eei  that  the  king  was  retiring  by  a side  path  up  tho  hill. 


106 


COMMENTABI18  OF 


Bet  out  in  pursuit  after  him^  fighting  with  the  Moors  at 
erery  step.  The  king  and  his  son,  who  were  mounted  upon 
their  elephants,  saw  that  they  were  pursued  by  our  men, 
turned  back  again  with  two  thousand  men  whom  they 
carried  in  their  company.  The  Portuguese  captains  awaited 
their  coming  at  the  head  of  a street,  and  with  groat  efforts 
and  bravo  determination  fell  upon  the  elephants  with  their 
lances,  as  they  were  coming  on  in  the  vanguard,  and  it  is 
related  that  Fernfto  Gomez  do  Lomos  was  the  foremost  in 
this  action  ; and  whereas  elephants  will  not  bear  with  being 
wounded,  they  turned  tail  and  charged  the  Moors  behind 
them  and  put  them  to  rout.  The  elophayt  on  which  the 
king  was  riding,  mad  with  the  mortal  wound  which  it  had 
received,  seized  the  black  man  who  was  guiding  it  with  its 
trunk)  and  roaring  loudly,  dashed  him  in  pieces,  and  tho 
king  being  already  wounded  in  the  hand,  sprang  out  of  the 
castle,  but  escaped  because  ho  was  not  recognised;  and 
thus  ho  and  his  son,  and  tho  king  of  Pilo,'  his  son-in-law, 
who  had  come  to  Malaca  but  a few  days  before  to  marry 
one  of  the  king's  daughters,  retreated  to  the  back  of  tho 
city. 

Afonso  Dalboquorque,  with  the  rest  of  his  men, — having 
forced  an  entrance  through  tho  stockades, — followed  up 
after  the  Moors  along  a street  which  led  to  the  bridge,  and 
killed  many  of  them ; but  because  the  men  of  the  cit/,  who 
were  fighting  in  tho  streets  with  our  forces,  were  very 
numerous,  Afonso  Dalboquerque,  fearing  ]iest  his  party 
should  begin  to  straggle,  made  them  rally  towai*ds  the 
bridge,  and  ordered  them  to  erect  a palisade  on  the  city 
side  j and  gave  charge  over  it  to  Jorge  Nunez  de  Lifto  and 
Nano  Yaz  de  Castelo-branco,  with  orders  fqr  them  to  com- 
mand ono  of  the  principal  streets  leading  to  the  bridge  with 
their  artillery.  ^ 

When  the  Moors  saw  this  they  gathered  themselves  to- 
' Hiif  word  is  writtou  Ann  in  the  previous  chapters. 


AFONSO  DA&BOaOCRQUK. 


107 


gether  in  the  oth^r  streets  of  the  city,  and  Afonso  Dalbo* 
querque  feeling  himself  at  length  free  of  them,  gave  orders 
that  another  palisading  should  be  erected  on  the  side  to- 
wards the  mosque,  starting  from  the  river  to  reach  up  to 
the  mosque,  in  such  a manner  that  the  bridge  remained  in 
the  middle  [between  this  palisade  and  the  one  mentioned 
above].  And  while  these  palieadings  were. in  .progress  of 
formation,  he  sent  Gaspar  de  Paiva  with  a hitndred  men  to 
set  fire  to  the  city  from  that  side  as  soon  as  the  sea-breeze 
should  begin  to  blow,  and  SirniXo  Martini  with  another  party 
of  a hundred  men,  to  set  fire  to  the  king's  houses  which 
stood  at  the  side  of  the  mosque.  When  the  fire  gained 
possession  of  one  part  and  the  other,  it  raged  so  fiercely 
that  it  destroyed  a great  part  of  the  city.  As  soon  as  the 
Moors  beheld  the  flames,  they  retired  a long  way  oif  from 
our  men.  • 

Hero  was  burnt  a wooden  house,  of  very  large  size  and 
very  well  built  with  joiners’  work,  about  thirty  palms 
breadth  solid  timber,  all  inlaid  with  gold,  built  up  on  thirty 
wheels,  every  one  of  which  was  as  largo  as  a hogshead,  and  it 
had  a spire,  which  was  the  finisLing^point  of  the  building,  of 
great  height,  covered  with  silken  flags,  and  the  whole  of  it 
hung  with  very  rich  silken  stuffs,  for  it  had  boon  prepared 
for  the  reception  of  the  king  of  Pfto  and  his  bride,  the 
daughter  of  the  king  of  Malaca,  who  were  to  make  their 
entry  through  the  city  with  great  blowings  of  trumpets  and 
festivities;  and  in  the  houses  of  the  king,  and  the  other 
bouses  round  about,  which  were  burned,  there  was  con- 
sumed by  fire  a great  store  of  merchandise  and  other 
things  of  great  price,  which  the  king  had  in  his  palace. 
And  when  this  was  completed,  they  returned  again  to  the 
bridge  where  our  men  were  stationed ; and  it  was  about 
two  hours  after  midday,  and  as  yet  the  men  had  not  eaten 
{mythiog. 

The  captains,  to  whom  Afonso  Dalboquerque  bad  en* 


108 


COMXllffTABJKS  OF 


trusted  the  duty  of  constructing  the  stockades,  went  to  him 
and  told  him  that  the  men,  being  tired,  and  suffering  from 
the  great  heat,  were  by  this  time  quite  ofit  of  heart  with 
their  work,  and  they  recommended  that  they  should  with- 
draw and  take  some  rest.  Afonso  Dalboquerque  put  them 
off,  for  he  hoped  to  get  the  barricades  completed,  and  so 
pass  the  night* there;  but  because  they  came  again  with 
more  earnestness  to  press  this,  he  made  a virtue  of  the 
necessity ; and,  th^  sun  being  now  gone  down,  he  began  to 
draw  off  his  men  to  the  boats.  When  the  Moors  perceived 
that  they  were  withdrawing,  they  began  to  open  fire  with 
large  matchlocks,  arrows,  and  blowing-tubgis,  and  wounded 
some  of  our  men,  yet  with  all  the  haste  they  made  Afonso  ’ 
Dalboquerque  ordered  the  men  to  carry  off  with  them  fifty 
large  bombards  that  had  been  captured  in  the  stockades 
upon  the  bridge ; and  when  the  men  had  rotuniod  to  the 
ships,  he  ordered  the  wounded  to  be  attended  to — about 
seventy  in  number — but  of  those  who  were  struck  with  the 
poisoned  arrows,  none  escaped  but  one,  Fornao  Gomez  de 
Lemos,  wlio  was  burned  with  a red-hot  iron  directly  he  was 
struck,  so  that  ultimately  God  spared  his  life. 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 

Ilow  the  king  of  Malaca,  after  the  Portuguese  had  withdrawn  to  their 
ships,  began  to  reconstruct  the  stockades  and  foJKtificd  his  position 
on  the  bridge ; and  of  the  message  which  Utemutaraja  sent  to  the 
great  Afonso  Dalboquerque. 

Directly  that  all  had  retired  into  the  ships,  the  king 
ordered  that  the  stockades  should  be  reconstructed,  and  made 
stronger  than  they  had  been  before,  and  placed  in  them 
double  the  quantity  of  artillery,  of  which  there  was  a great 
supply  in  Malaca,  as  will  be  related  hereafter,  and  ordered 
the  ^bridge  to  be  divided  into  sections  with  very  strong 


AFONSO  DALBOQDERQUB. 


109 


palisades,  and  erect  others  in  one  of  the  principal  streets 
leading  from  the  city  to  the  bridge^  and  in  them  ho  placed 
much  artillery,  a^d  on  the  other  side  of  the  mosque  ho  did 
just  the  same,  and  on  the  shore  side,  where  the  landing, 
place  was  situate,  he  ordered  his  men  to  throw  down  many 
chevaux-de-friset  full  of  poison/  to  prick  our  men  when  they 
made  their  landing.  And  because  the  Javanese,  who  com- 
posed the  principal  soldiery  under  his  command,  were  dis- 
contented at  not  receiving  their  pay,  in  order  to  content 
them,  he  ordered  that  they  should  be  paid  all  that  was  due 
to  them  of  their  pay,  and  three  months  in  advance  as  well, 
for  he  was  in  groat  dread  lest  Afonso  Dalboquorque  should 
return  again  to'*attack  the  city.  And  while  he  was  thus 
occupied  with  the  fortifying  of  his  stockades,  a Javanese 
headman,  who  was  called  (Jtemutaraja,*  who  lived  in  the 
settlement  of  Upe,  and  had  about  five  or  six  thousand 
Javanese  slaves  of  his  own  or  of  his  sons  and  sons-iu-law, 
a very  rich  man,  Ind  one  who  traded  very  extensively  to  all 
parts  of  the  world,  sent  a present  of  sandal  woods  to  Afonso 
Balboquerque,  and  secretly  bogged  a safeguard  for  him- 
self and  for  all  that  settlement  wherein  he  lived,  declaring 
that  he  desired  to  have  peace  and  friendship  with  him,  and 
to  serve  the  king* of  Portugal  in  all  that  lay  in  his  power. 

Afonso  Dalboquorque  accepted  his  oflbr  of  friendship, 
and  sent  him  the  safeguard  and  sometimes  some  presents, 
always  striving  to  keep  him  on  our  side.  Now,  although 
the  agreement  which  had  been  made  with  this  man  stipu- 
lated that  he  sfiould  give  no  assistance,  an«l  show  no  favour 
to  the  king  of  Malaca,  after  three  days,  Afonso  Dalboquer- 
qpe  sent  and  told  him  that  he  had  been  informed  that  after 

* Mandou  lanfar  mnitot  abrolhos,  eftetos  de  7<cn;a,  etc.  The  word 
herva  U used  in  the  coucludiug  ftedtence  of  the  previous  chapter  in  the 
(Unification  of  poinonoui  juice  of  herbs;  but  in  this  passage,  although  I 
prefer  the  translation  I give  above,  there  is  a possibility  of  the  word 
being  need  in  the  sense  of  graiss  or  prickly  brushwood. 

* The  latter  part  of  this  name  is  evidently  the  titular  designation 

rajah,  ^ 


no 


COUUENTABIKS  Of 


he  had  sent  him  tlie  safeguard,  he  was  nevertheless  helping 
the  king  with  his  men  to.  make  the  stockades  on  the  bridge, 
which  was  not  the  thing  that  they  both  had  agreed  upon, 
neither  was  it  according  to  the  law  of  friendship  for  him  to 
favour  his  enemies  against  him.  Utemutaraja  replied,  that 
it  wag  true  he  was  rendering  certain  assistance  of  men  to 
the  king  for  constructing  the«stockade.s,  but  it  was  insigni- 
ficant, and  bo  only  did  so  to  put  him  off  his  guard,  for  by 
no  other  means  covild  he  live  in  this,  to  him,  a foreign  land, 
unless  he  perforniod’this  service. 

But  with  all  this  provocation,  Afonso  Dalboqiierquo  did 
not  cease  to  adhere  to  his  promise  of  safeguard,  and  ordered 
his  captains  that  upon  the  inhabitants  of  the  territory  of 
Utemutaraja  tliey  should  make  no  requisition ; and  this  he 
did,  not  because  he  had  deserved  any  better  treatment 
than  the  others,  but  in  order  to  have  a fewer  number  of 
enemies  in  the  city.  And  so  also  he  gave  the  foreign 
Moorish  merchants  to  understand,  that  he  had  not  ordered 
a sacking  of  the  city  out  of  regard  for  them ; yet,  neverthe- 
less, if  the  king  would  not  give  way  in  his  opinions,  ho,  on 
his  part,  could  not  restrain  his  men  from  destroying  the 
city  when  they  made  a second  attack  upon  it.  And  so 
from  that  time  henceforward  the  merchafits  were  the  men 
who  coun.selled  the  king  not  to  desire  war,  but  to  come  to 
terms,  and  make  peace  wdth  Afonso  Dalboquerqne.  But,  as 
the  king  was  now  obstinately  bent  on  his  purpose,  he  did  not 
fall  in  with  their  opinion,  but  told  them  that  only  a few 
days  back  they  had  given  him  exactly  the  opposite  advice. 

When  a few  days  had  elapsed,  Afonso  Dalboquorque, 
seeing  that  the  king  had  not  sent  him  any  reply,  though  he 
had  already  tasted  the  power  and  capability  of  the  Portu- 
guese, became  anxious,  for  he  was  forcibly  compelled  for  a 
second  time  to  risk  his  men  in  a danger  like  the  past,  to  the 
end  that  ho  might  achieve  the  taming  of  the  kiug^s  pride  ; 
and  he  had  not  in  the  land  any  means  of  building  a fortress 


AFONSO  DALfiOQUBliQUlC. 


in 


—•which  it  was  his  chief  intect  to  do— neither  could  Ruy  de 
Araujo  give  any  advice  on  these  events,  for  all  the  time  he 
had  been  in  captivity  he  had  been  shut  up  in  a house.  And, 
on  the  other  hand,^he  saw  that  leaving  Malaea  in  the  power 
of  the  Moors  meant  total  destruction  to  the  trade  of  India 
and  to  jour  ships.  And  with  these  perplexed  thoughts, 
which  were  oouatantly  present  iij  his  mind,  not  knowing  in 
what  kind  of  conclusion  this  enterprise  against  ^alaca  would 
result,  he  placed  eveiything  in  the  hands  pf  Our  Lord,  for 
this  was  always  the  best  remedy  that  ho  could  find  in  all 
his  affairs ; and,  putting  his  trust  in  Him,  he  began  to  give 
orders  and  make  hiutiaelf  ready  in  some  matters  which  were 
needful  for  the  locond  attack  upon  the  city. 


CHAPTER  XXV. 

* 

How  the  groat  Afonso  Dalboqiierqno  prepared  hiinstlf  for  renewing  the 
attack  upon  the  stockades  which  the  king  had  set  upon  the  bridge  : 
and  how  the  Cliinese  desired  of  him  permission  to  return  to  their 
land : and  of  the  ambassador  whom  he  sent  with  them  to  the  king 
of  Sifto. 

When  Afonso  Dalboquerque  perceived  that  the  king,  be- 
cause of  the  little  account  ho  made  of  the  Portuguese — not 
taking  Jo  heart  the  lesson  of  experience  which  he  had  had 
the  first  day  they  attacked  the  city — was  again  setting  up 
stockades  on  the  bridge,  with  men  and  artillery  for  its  de- 
fence, he  determined  in  his  invincible  mind  to  attack  it 
again,  and  break  their  pride ; and,  with  this  object  in  view, 
he  prepared  a largo  junk,  with  many  men  and  artillery, — be- 
cause these  vessels  are  very  lofty, — and  it  was  to  be  placed 
in  a position  overtowering  the  bridge,  in  order  that  our  men 
might  avail  themselves  of  its  shelter,  and  more  securely  be 
able  to  attack  the  stockades  which  the  Moors  had  built. 
And  he  appointed  Antonio  Dabreu  captain  of  the  junk,  and 


112 


COMMENmlSS  Of 


ordered  Lim  to  arrange  in  it  lodging-placea  for  the  soldiers, 
and  provisions  and  all  other  things  that  were  necessary  for 
that  affair.  For,  if  any  great  rain-storm  should  occur,  they 
could  take  shelter  in  it,  and  the  suppfies,  of  which  they 
wer^  in  great  need,  would  not  be  lost.  And  for  guard  over 
this  junk  he  appointed  a caravela,  whereof  Simfi^  Afonso 
was  captain,  and  the  great  galley  in  which  Duarte  da  Silva 
went  as  captain,  for  its  protection.  And  when  all  this  was 
ready  he  told  Antonio  Dabreu  to  sail  up  along  the  river  and 
pass  over  a spit  of  sand  which  lay  before  the  bridge,  while 
ho  himself,  with  all  the  rest  of  the  men,  would  follow  up 
close  behind.  But  because  the  junk  drew  very  deeply  in 
the  water,  and  could  not  pass  over  the  spit  on  account  of 
the  neap  tide,  Afonso  Dalboquerque  desired,  in  order  not  to 
lose  any  more  time,  to  send  another  junk  with  less  draught 
of  water,  but  this  also  could  not  pass  over,  so  he  was  com- 
pelled to  wait  for  the  spring  tide.^ 

When  the  king  of  Malaca  saw  that  the  junk  could  not 
pass  the  sand-bank,  and  that  for  all  that  it  remained  there, 
and  did  not  go  back  again,  he  sent  four  barges  full  of  firewood, 
and  pitch,  and  oil,  to  set  it  on  fire,  and  as  soon  as  the  tide 
began  to  run  down  they  set  them  on  fire,  and  let  them  go 
on  the  turn  of  the  tide  down  tho  river  straight  towards  the 
junk,  and  this  they  did  for  nine  successive  nights. 

Now,  as  Afonso  Dalboquerque  observed  the  qrder  in 
which  the  Moors  arranged  themselves  for  the  burning  of 
the  junk,  he  ordered  the  captains,  when  they  had  withdrawn 
each  night,  to  make  their  arrangements  for  “sleeping  close 
by  him  in  their  boats,  and  with  bowsprits  and  harpoons 
hung  with  iron  chains  to  turn  the  fire-ships  out  of  their 
course  as  they  came  on  in  flames,  so  as  to  prevent  the  jnnk 
from  catching  fire;  and  they  carried  outHhis  order  so  well 
that  this  design  of  the  Moors  was  of  no  effect.  And  while 
this  delay  was  going  on,  waiting  for  the  spring  tides,  Afonso 

* Spiiog  tides  rise  11  feet,  neaps  8^  feet,  at  Malacca  in  the  Rosda— 
Vhim  Sfa  Di^tetory^  vol.  i,  p.  79,  1878. 


APpNSO  DAtBOQUKRQCE.  • 


113 


Dalboquerque  prdert^  the  iron-smiths,  whom  ho  had  brought 
from  Goa,  to  set  op  their  forges  and  begin  to  repair  some 
weapons  which  were  out  of  order,  and  they  made  a magazine 
for  the  crossbows,  for  they  were  in  much  need  of  it.  ^nd 
he  ordered  the  Factor  of  the  Fleet  to  get  ready  barrels,^ 
hatchets;  hoes,  picks,  and  all  that  was  requisite,  in  order 
that  when  they  had  gained  the  ^bridge  they  might  imme- 
diately set  up  stockades  therein,  and  to  arraugo*for  the  con- 
struction of  mantlets,  to  the  end  that  under  shelter  of  them 
nor  men  might  go  in  better  security  from  the  enemy’s  bom- 
bards, and  when  all  was  completed  and  ready,  to  cause  every- 
thing to  be  embarked  on  board  of  the  large  barques  and 
junks  which  ho  had  taken. 

And  because  Afonso  Dalboquerqiie  had  been  informed 
that  the  King  had  determined,  as  soon  as  our  men  disem- 
barked, to  send  down  a number  of  watchboats  and  many 
launches  by  night  to  set  fire  to  our  Fleet,  ho  ordered  Pero 
Gonijalves;  the  Chief  Pilot,  with  all  the  mariners,  to  go  and 
sleep  on  board  tho  ships  every  night,  and  he  would  give 
orders  for  a good  look  out  to  be  kept  over  them,  for  if  any 
alarm  should  occur  he  could  render  assistance  if  required. 

While  Afonso  Dalboquerque  was  engaged  in  arranging 
all  these  matters  the  Chinese  Captains  went  to  him  and 
bogged  his  permission  for  their  departure,  inasmuch  as  tho 
season  of*  their  monsoon  had  arrived,  and  they  begged  also 
that  he  would  of  his  kindness  give  permission  likewise 
for  thsir  taking  a little  pepper  which  they  had  in  their  ships 
belonging  to  a Moorish  merchant,  a native  of  Malaca,  from 
whom  they  had  received  very  good  treatment;  and  to  do 
thei^  a kindness  he  granted  this  permission,  and  gave 
orders  that  th^iy  should  have  given  to  them  all  the  supplies 
which  they  needec(  for  their'  voyage,  and  made  them  a 
present  of  a few  things  which  ho  yet  had  left  from  Portugal, 
and  desired  them  (seeing  they  were  bent  on  going),  to'shape 
» Pipas. 


lU 


COMXXNtABllS  Of 


their  oonrae  for  Sifto,  for  he  wished  to  s^d  in  their  company 
ft  messenger  with  letters  for  the  King. 

They  were  very  happy  at  this  result,  |and  promised  hiokl 
thftt  they  would  present  the  messenger  to  the  Kii^  and^ 
return  very  soon  with  the  reply,  and  would  highly  extol 
prowess  of  the  Portuguese  and  the  little  dread  they  had  ^ 
encountering. the  enemy’s  bombards. 

Afonso  Dalboquerque  lost  no  time  in  making 
Duarte  Fernandez,  who  had  been  in  captivity  with  Ruy^ 
de  Araujo  and  knew  the  language  very  well,  and  by  him 
he  wrote  to  the  King  of  Si9.o  of  the  events  which  had  taken 
place  in  Malaca,  and  how  his  determination  was  to  destroy 
the  city  and  build  therein  a fortress,  and  cast  the  Moors  out, 
and  how  pleased  he  would  be  if  the  people  of  his  land  [of 
Si&o]  would  come  and  live  it,  and  that  tho  King  D.  Manuel, 
King  of  Portugal,  his  Lord,  having  been  informed  that  he 
was  a Hindoo  and  not  a Moor,  had  much  affection  for  him 
and  desired  to  have  peace  and  friendship  with  him,  and  had 
ordered  him  [Afonso  Dalboquerque],  as  to  all  the  ships  and 
people  of  that  kingdom  desirous  of  trading  in  his  ports, 
that  he  was  to  grant  them  all  the  safeguard  that  they  found 
neoessaxy.  And  .by  this  Duarte  Fernandez  he  sent  the  Kiuig 
of  Siao  one  of  our  swords,  all  mounted  in  gold  and  preciona 
stones,  made  after  our  fashion ; and  Duarte  Fernandeft 
having  been  thus  despatched,  the  Chinese  set  forth  for  their 
own  land  highly  pleased  with  Afonso  Dalboquerque. 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 

The  speech  which  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  made  to  the  Captaitis 
and  men  of  the  Fleet  for  the  second  attack  upon  the  city,  and  what 
passed  thereupon. 

When  the  great  Afoudo  Dalboquerque  had  all  things 
ready  that  were  necessary  for  attacking  the  city  again,  it 


AFONSO  OALBOgUBROUB. 


lU 


was  reported  to  him  that  there  were  sotno  among  the 
Oaptaina  who  were  in  the  habit  of  saying  that  they  did  not 
t^ink  it  of  hervice  to  the  King  for  them  to  maintain  the 
^^pity  nor  to  build  a fortreas  within  it.  On  being  apprised  of 
Hub  he  ordered  them  to  be  called  to  his  ship,  with  all  the 
FidalgOB  and  Cavaliers  of  the  Fleet,  and  said  to  them 
S Sirs,  you  will  have  .no  difficulty  in  remembering  that 
^hen  we  decided  upon  attacking  this  fcity,  it  was  with  the 
determination  of  budding  a fortress  within  it,  for  so  it 
appeared  to  all  to  be  necessary,  and  after  having  captured 
it  I was  unwilling  to  let  slip  the  possession  of  it,  yet, 
because  ye  all  advised  me  to  do  so,  I left  it,  and  withdrew ; 
but  being  ready,  as  you  see,  to  put  my  hands  upon  it  again 
once  more,  I learned  that  you  had  already  changed  your 
opinion : now  this  cannot  be  because  the  Moors  have  de- 
stroyed the  best  part  of  us,  but  on  account  of  my  sins, 
which  merit  the  failure  of  accomplishing  this  undertaking 
in  the  way  that  I had  desired.  And,  inasmuch  as  my  will  and 
determination  is,  as  long  as  I am  Governor  of  India,  nei^er 
to  fight  nor  to  hazard  men  on  land,  except  in  those  parts 

, > • Correa’s  vereion  of  this  speech,  which  is  given  in  i)\Q  Lendan  da 
vol.  ii,  pp.  232-234,  is  worthy  of  perusal  hero  as  showing  how  the 
Ktwo  reports  of  libe  same  event,  each  professing  to  bo  derived  from 
' ^thentic  sources,  differ  from  each  other : “ Seubores  oapitSos,  e nobres 
fidalgAs,  bem  sabem  vossas  merc6s  que  todo  o oetodo  d’£l  Hey  nosso 
ifenlior  depeude  e csU  posto  nas  vomas  mSos,  em  que  estit  muy  scguro  do 
nitini  receber  quebra,  nem  falta,  em  quanto  as  vidas  tiverdos  nos  cor[>o(» ; 
do  ^ue  darso  bom  testimunbo  os  que  vivcrem,  o cu,  quo  o tenho  bem 
vialb  eom  incus  olhos,  nunqua  poderei  dizor  os  grandes  vossos  meroci- 
xsmitde-  ganhados  com  voaso  sangue  e tautos  trabalhos,  a quo  K1  Key 
ttoam  senbor  vos  be  em  mujrta  obriga^  o,  c (jue  8aa  Alteza 

som  faltarA  Bem  sabem  vossas  tuorcSs  que  nds  hiamon  pera  o estreito 
de  Meca,  a que  nos  Soa  Altesa  mandava  hir,  com  intcnto  de  sequar 
aqtiella  navega^Ao^,  e passagem  da  pimenta  e drogas  quo  os  roouros  U 
pamaYBo,  que  Ihe  fazem  grande  avesso  a seus  tratoe ; ao  que  nos  hiamos 
com  toda’  Tootade,  e polo  querer  de  Nosso  Senhor  tivemos  coutrastes  do 
ventos  que  nom  oonsentirAo  que  lA  fossemos,  e arribatnos  com  tanto 
irabalho,  e porqae  se  nom  perdesse  o gasto  que  era  feito  n*  armada,  per 

I 2 


110 


COMMKNTAlbiVS  Of 


wherein  I mast  build  a fortress  to  maintain  thdmj  as  I hare 
already  told  you  before  this,  I desire  you  earnestly,  of  your 
goodness,  although  you  all  have  already  agreed  upon  what 
is  to  be  done,  to  freely  give  me  again  your  opinions  in 
^ writing  as  to  what  1 ought  to  do ; for  inasmuch  as  I have 
to  give  an  account  of  these  matters  and  a justification  of 
my  proceedings  to  the  King  D.  Manuel,  our  Lord,  I am  un- 
willing to  be  left  alone  to  bear  the  blame  of  them;  and 
although  there  be  many  reasons  which  I could  allege  in 
favour  of  our  taking  this  city  and  building  a fortress  therein 
to  maintain  possession  of  it,  two  only  will  I mention  to  you, 
on  this  occasion,  as  tending  to  point  ou^  wherefore  you 
ought  not  to  turn  bask  from  what  you  have  agreed  upon. 

**  The  first  is  the  great  service  which  we  shall  perform  to 
Our  Lord  in  casting  the  Moors  out  of  this  country,  and 
quenching  the  fire  of  this  sect  of  Mafamede  so^hat  it  may 
never  burst  out  again  hereafter ; and  I am  so  sanguine  as 
to  hope  for  this  from  our  undertaking,  that  if  we  can  only 
achieve  the  task  before  us,  it  will  result  in  the  Moors  re- 
signing India  altogether  to  our  rule,  for  the  greater  part  of 
them — or  perhaps  all  of  them — live  upon  the  trade  of  this 

couBelho  de  Toesaa  niorcC>8  liem  atentado,  foy  assentado,  pois  tinhamos 
tempo,  que  viessemoe  c«ta  viagem  a Malaca,  pera  livifU’fnos  os  oatiroti 
e tomar  viagan^a  d’esta  cidade,  dos  mortos,  e rouboa  que  erato  feitoB ; 
oude  Nosao  Senbor  aquy  nos  aportou,  e sobre  boos  conselhoa  kvidoa 
cometoinos  eata  guerra,  quo  eatd  no  esta  do  quo  vt^oa,  com  que  bem  oer- 
' toa  eataea  quo  a cidade  aerd  noaaa  polo  querer  de  Noaso  Seuhor.  Mas 
quo  averd  algumaa  pesaoaa  que  farfto  duvida  ^ue  aendo  tomada 
noni  aerd  poaaivel  fazer  u'ella  forteloza  e a aoatennos,  o que  ae  aflify  nom 
foaae  logo  K1  Rey  nosao  eeubor  ficava  com  toda  a perda,  que  afto  muytaa; 
a saber  : o gfwto  d'armada,  perda  de  aua  genie,  e sobre  tudo  eataa  pert^a 
aem  nenhum  fruito,  que  aeri  grande  aua  perda,  porque  eata  cidade  he  o 
celciro  de  todolaa  drogaa  e riqas  i^prcadariaa,  que  oa  mouroa  de  todaa 
as  partes  da  India  e do  eatroito  de  Meca  aquy  vem  bhaoar,  e levSo  tuaa 
naoa  oarregadas  e pasa&o  per  antre  as  ilhaa,  e ae  oolhem  ao  eatreito  muy 
aeguro  de  oa  tox>Arem  noeaaa  armiylaa,  e aa  drogaa  que  levfto,  que  he 
grande  aotna,  oorrem  polo  Cairo,  e a Veneia,  e d’ahy  a ponente  e levante, 
com  que  dSo  muyto  abatimento  da  drogaa  da  eaaa  da  India,  que  vCo  ter  a 
Frandea.  Outraa  drogaa  paaato  a India,  que  ooa  veudem  por  treadobxo 


AFOKBO  DALBOQUKRQUB. 


117 


country  and  are  become  great  and  rioli,  and  lovd^i  of  exten- 
sive treasures.  It  is,  too,  well  worthy  of  belief  that  as  the 
King  of  H^laca,  who  has  already  onoo  been  diacomhtod 
and  had  proof  of  our  strength,  with  no  hope  of  obtaining 
any  succour  from  any  other  quarter — sixteen  days  having 
already  elapsed  since  this  took  place — makes  no  endeavour 
to  negotiate  with  us  for  tho  security  of  his  estate,  Our  Lord 
is  blinding  his  judgment  and  hardeijiag  his  heart,  and 
desires  the  completion  of  this  affair, of  Malaca : for  when  wo 
were  committing  ourselves  to  tho  business  of  cruising  in  the 
Straits  [of  the  Red  Sea]  where  tho  King  of  Portugal  had 
often  ordered  me  to  go  (for  it  was  there  that  II is  Highness 
considered  wo  could  cut  down  thu  commerce  which  tho 
Moors  of  Cairo,  of  Moca,  and  of  Judu,  carry  on  with  these 
parts),  Our  Lord  for  his  service  thought  right  to  load  us 
hither,  for  when  Malaca  is  taken  the  places  on  tho  Straits 
must  bo  shut  up,  and  they  will  never  more  be  able  to  intro- 
duce their  spicorios  into  those  places. 

And  the  other  reason  is  the  additional  service  which  we 
shall  render  to  the  King  D.  Manuel  in  taking  this  city, 
because  it  is  the  headquarters  of  all  the  spiceries  and  drugs 

do  qua  aquy  ao  coniprao  ii  troco  de  roupaa  do  Cambuya  quo  trawm  ; do 
qual  trato  de  tantoa  anoe  os  mouros  de  toda  a ludia  sso  grandos  em 
muytas  riquezas  cum  quo  aao  seuhores  uas  terraa,  e duH  corac<>efl  dos 
lieys  e senhores,  com  a qual  ].M:»flBan(;a  nos  tern  feitos  tantos  malles  em 
Calecuti,  e por  totlolas  partes  da  India,  quo  se  o poder  grande  d’estes 
xuouros  noui  fdra,  donniinlo  tiverainoa  a India  dolsiixo  dus  fv^s.  l^ois 
que  mdr  servi^o  pcxlcmos  fajujr  a Nosso  Senhor  em  favor  de  uusaa  santa  fe 
aenll04)unirni08  ates  mourun,  e sous  tratos  aquy  os  confundinnos  e apa- 
garmos,  que  percSo  este  tamanho  betu  cornu  Iho  a«^uy  tonianuM  ? E poii 
estA  tio  raanifeato  que  este  8c*rvi<;o  nom  farctuos,  indaquo  tomoraoi  esU 
Alidade  chea  d’ouro,  so  a num  deixassemos  segura  com  segura  forteleza, 
que  durasse  pera  sempre  cste  tamanbo  8ervi<;o  de  No«s>  Scnhi»r,  e d’El 
Key,  e seas  rassalloe  que  i/cstai^  partee  mill  tamos ; tumaretnos  eitef 
tratoa,  com  que  iios  faremos  nquissimos  assy  cornu  o estAo  os  tuuuros,  e 
com  Ihe  asi^  tomarmos  scus  pruveitos  os  hiremos  dcitando  fdra  da  India, 
que  serA  quando  a Nosso  Seubor  aprouver. 

% poiM  tomando  nds  agora  esU  cidade,  com  tua  taoU  riqucuk,  aeii 
pera  ndt  grande  bonra  e proveito,  e d^ElRey  iiosm  se^or,  que  noe 


118 


COMMBNTABIBS  Of 


Which  the  Moors  carry  every  year  hence  to*  the  Struts 
without  our  being  able  to  prevent  them  from  so  doing ; but 
if  we  deprive  them  of  this  their  ancient  market|there,  there 
does  not  remain  for  tliem  a single  port^  nor  a single  situa- 
tion, so  commodious  in  the  whole  of  these  parts,  where  they 
can  carry  on  their  trade  in  these  things.  For  after  we  were 
in  possession  of  the  popper  of  Malabar,  never  more  did 
any  reach  Cairo,  except  that  which  the  Moors  carried  thither 
from  these  parts,  and'  forty  or  fifty  ships,  which  sail  hence 
'every  year  ladon  with  all  sorts  of  spiceries  bound  to  M4ca, 
cannot  be  stopped  without  groat  expense  and  large  fleets, 
which  must  necessarily  cruise  about  continually  in  the  offing 
of  Cape  Comoriin;  and  the  pepper  of  Malabar,  of  which 
they  may  hope  to  get  some  portion  because  they  have  the 
King  of  Calicut  on  their  side,  is  in  our  hands,  under  the 
eyes  of  the  Governor  of  India,  from  whom  the  Moors  cannot 
carry  off*  so  much  with  impunity  as  they  hope  to  do;  and  I 
1 hold  it  as  very  certain  that  if  we  take  this  trade  of  Malaca 
Jaway  out  of  their  hands,  Cairo  and  M4ca  are  entirely  ruined, 
and  to  Venice  will  no  spiceries  be  conveyed  except  that 
which  her  merchants  go  and  buy  in  Portugal 

mant^ra,  o sostera  nossas  gera<;5e8,  e com  seu  tanto  gaato  aquy  somos 
aportados  com  eeta  armada,  e com  os  poderes  d’ella  ganhtmos,  e El  Key 
tudo  ficaria  pordendo  sc  Ihe  nom  dcssemoe  preraicias  do  seu  gasto  e 
nossa  obriga^fio,  que  Ihe  foi^^lamente  devemos,  que  ha  de  ser  aquy  Ihe 
fassermos  sua  forteleza  com  nossos  trabalhos,  porque  possamos  diier  que 
ganhdnios  csta  cidade  in  lan<;adas  com  nosso  sangue,  e Ihe  entregamos 
arrematada  pcra  scmpre  em  seu  scrvi90,  pedindolhe  ^e  este  tamanbo 
service  nos  pague  a noasos  filhos  e gcra<j6eg,  do  que  elle  se  nom  poderk 
escusar;  tudo,  senhores,  ros  he  presente,  pon^ue  cada  hum  por  seu 
assinado  me  ha  de  dar  sua  detennioa^ao,  pera  me  eu  lirrar  ante  Sua 
Alteza  de  quern  me  accusar.  Pera  que  sem  duvida  Ihes  affirmo  que® 
indaque  n'esta  bora  Malaca  se  me  entregasse,  com  toda  sua  liqueza,  a 
nSo  tomaria  se  n*ella  nom  ouver  de  a mUhor,  e n^us  forte,  e pos- 
sante  forteleza  que  ouver  n’eetes  partes ; pois  Malaca  he  a mais  populosa 
cidade  da  India,  que  estd  no  mco  e estremo  de  todolas  riqas  mercadarias 
e tratos  que  por  tdla  correm.  E poisj'senhores,  tudo  Ihe  tenho  apteseu- 
tado,  voasas  mereds  agora  se  determinem  no  que  fa^amos,  porque  en 
nada  hey  de  fazer,  senfio  o que  per  dies  for  assentado.*' 


A70K80  DiXB0QU«RQU8. 


119 


But  if  yon  are  of  opinion  that,  because  Malaca  is  a largo 
city  and  yery  populous,  it  will  give  us  much  trouble  to 
maintain  our  possession  of  it,  no  such  doubts  as  these  ought 
to  arise,  for  Vhen  once  the  city  is  gained,  all  the  rest  of  the 
Kingdom  is  of  so  little  account  that  the  King  has  not  a 
single  place  left  where  he  can  rally  his  forces ; and  if  you 
dread  lest  by  taking  the  city  we  be  involved  in  great  ex- 
penses, and  on  account  t)f  the  season/of  the  year  there  be 
no  place  where  our  men  and  our  Flejsd  can  bo  recruited,  I 
trust  in  God’s  mercy  that  when  Mafaca  is  held  in  subjection 
to  our  dominion  by  a strong  fortress,  provided  that  the  Kings 
of  Portugal  appoint  thereto  those  who  are  well  experienced 
as  Governors  and  Managers  of  the  Kevenues,  the  taxes  of 
the  land  will  pay  all  the  expenses  which  may  anse  in  the 
administration  of  the  city ; and  if  the  merchants  who  are 
wont  to  resort  thither — accustomed  as  they  are  to  live 
under  the  tyrannical  yoke  of  the  Malays— experience  a taste 
of  our  just  dofv^ing,  truthfulness,  frankness,  and  mildness, 
and  come  to  know  of  the  instructions  of  the  King  D. 
Manuel,  our  Lord,  wherein  he  commands  that  all  his  sub- 
jects in  these  parts  be  very  well  treated,  I venture  to  affirm 
that  they  will  all  return  and  take  up  their  abode  in  the  city 
again,  yea,  and  build  the  walls  of  their  houses  with  gold; 
and  all  these  matters  which  here  I lay  before  you  may  be 
secured  to  us  by  this  half-turn  of  the  key,  which  is  that  wo 
build  a fortress  in  ibis  city  of  Malaca  and  sustain  it,  and 
that  this  land  be  brought  under  the  dominion  of  the  Portu- 
guese, and  tho  Kiog  D.  Manuel  be  styled  true  king  thereof^ 
and  therefore  I desire  you  of  your  kindness  to  consider 
serionsly  the  enterprise  that  ye  have  in  hand,  and  not  to 
leave  it  to  fall  to  the  ground.” 

When  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  had  brought  his 
harangue  to  an  end  in  the  words  which  I have  recounted, 
tibe  Members  of  tho  council  held  among  themselves  divers 
opinions,  some  leaning  to  this,  and  others  to  that  side,  and 


120 


COM&1SKTARX10  OF 


the  result  of  the  meeting  was  that  the  majority  again  de-* 
dared  that  it  would  be  of  service  to  the  King  to"  take  the  city 
of  Malaca  and  cast  the  Moors  out  of  it,  and  build  a fortress 
therein.  The  others  were  of  a contrary  opinion,  knd  declared 
that  the  city  ought  not  to  be  again  attacked,  for  it  was  very 
doubtful  if  the  undertaking  could  bo  accomplished,  and 
that  the  vengeance  which  had  been  meted  out  to  the  Moors 
for  their  treatment  (^f  Diogo  Lopez  de  Sequeira  and  his 
men  was  sufficiently  Devore,  and  even  if  they  had  all  things 
necessary  for  the  construction  of  the  fortress  there  was  not 
time  enough  for  its  completion,  for  they  were  already  at  the 
beginning  of  the  monsoon,  and  it  was  absolutely  necessary 
to  support  India,  for  no  one  could  tell  how  affairs  at  Goa 
had  gone  on  since  they  had  set  out  from  that  city. 

Afonso  Dalboquerque,  perceiving  these  differences  of 
opinion  which  were  held  in  the  council,  yielded  to  the 
^ majority  and  resolved  to  attack  the  city  and  fortify  himself 
in  it,  and  as  for  all  other  doubts  which  were  raised  by  the 
opposite  party,  to  put  them  into  the  hands  of  Our  Lord 
Josus  Christ  that  Ho  might  order  them  all  as  best  to  his 
service,  and  he  commanded  that  a formal  resolution  should 
bo  drawn  up  by  the  Secretary,  whereijnto  he  put  his  signa- 
ture, as  did  also  all  the  Captains,  Fidalgos,  and  Cavaliers 
who  wore  there. 


CHAPTER  XXVII. 

How  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  again  attacked  the  city  according 
to  the  resolution  which  had  been  arrived  at,  and  how  he  entered 
the  bridge  by  force  of  arms  and  fortified  himself  on  it 

Having  taken  the  opinions  of  the  Captains,  Fidalgos,  and 
Cavaliers  of  the  Fleet,  under  their  signaturSs,  as  I have 
related,  the  gi’eat  Afotiso  Dalboquerque  made  up  his  mind 
to  attack  the  city,  and  taking  it\  by  the  aid  of  our  Lord,  to 


AFONSO  DALBOQUBfiQUB. 


121 


brtify  liimself  therein.  And  bec^se  the  Moors  were  in  an 
advanced  stale  of  preparation;  and  had  arranged  a better 
lystem  of^  defence  than  they  had  on  the  first  occasion  when 
)ur  men  made  an  entry  into  the  city,  he  decided  with  all  the 
Daptains  to  attack  the  bridge  with  hi4  whole  force  in  one 
company. 

Having  agreed  upon  this  method  of  attack,  all  went  away 
to  their  respective  ships*  to  get  ready,  waiting  for  the  day 
when  it  would  be  high  water  in  tho  Buying  tides,  so  that  the 
junk  could  get  up  to  the  bridge  ^nd  when  the  time  was 
come — on  a Friday,  two  hours  before  morning — Afonso  Dal- 
boquerque  gave  orders  for  the  signal  which  he  had  agreed 
upon,  to  wake  tSem,  and  they,  as  they  were  already  prepared, 
came  on  board  his  ship,  and  from  it  set  forth  all  together  in 
their  boats ; and  when  Antonio  Dabreu  in  the  junk  had  now 
arrived  within  a crossbow-shot  from  tbo  bridge,  the  Moors 
began  to  open  fire  upon  him  from  one  side  and  tho  other 
with  large  matchlocks,^  blowing  tubes,  and  poisoned  arrows; 
and  with  bombards  which  threw  leaden  shot  as  large  as  an 
espera'  they  swept  the  decks  of  the  junk  from  one  side  and 
the  other,  and  as  Antonio  Dabreu  did  not  seek  therein  any. 
place  of  safety  whore  he  could  avoid  tho  shots  which  tliey 
kept  on  pouring  into  the  junk,  he  was  tho  first  who  was  hit 
with  a bulletcfrom  a largo  matchlock,  which  struck  him  on 
the  jaw  and  carried  away  many  of  his  teeth  and  part  of  his 
tongue. 

Afonso  Dalboquerque,  who  was  in  hi.s  boat  close  by  the 
junk,  seeing  Antonio  Dabreu  wounded,  ordered  him,  more  by 
force  than  by  his  own  wish,  to  bo  taken  to  tho  ship  to  have 
his  wounds  dressed,  and  appointed  Pero  Dalpoem  to  go  on 
•board  the  junk  and  act  as  Captain  of  it  until  Antonio  Dabreu 
was  well  again.  When  the  delay  that  had  thus  arisen  had 

» EspingardSes. 

* Espera  or  Esfera^  an  ancient  kind  of  artillery—jB/u^coit,  But 
see  also  vol.  ii,  p.  120,  note  6.  ' * 


COKHWTMtnm  XMT 

passed  alriiy--not  mnc¥^titn6  having  waefed^thi^ 
went  on  again  a second  tim^  with  the  jank  leai^iug  the  way, 
in  the  order  which  they  had  appointed^  and  when  the  jnnk 
drew  np  alongside,  as  it  was  very  lofty  and  qufte  overhang 
the  bridge,  as  I have  already  said,  the  Moors,  not  being 
able  to  bear  the  severe  handling  which  our  men  gave  them 
from  the  round  top  of  the  mainmast^  with  many  canisters  of 
gunpowder,  and  darl^,^  and  matchlocks,  fled,  deserting  the 
bridge,  and  withdre^to  the  stockades  which  they  had  on 
the  bridge,  on  this  side\pd  that. 

Afonso  Dalboquerque,  perceiving  that  the  Moors  were 
beginning  to  fall  into  confusion,  ordered  ^e  Captains  to 
press  on  more  quickly  at  the  oars,  and  all  united  in  a body 
set  to  work  to  fall  upon  the  stockades,  according  to  the 
preconcerted  arrangement.  And  although  they  found  be- 
hind them  a great  force  of  Moors,  who  defended  them  for  a 
considerable  space  of  time  with  signal  bravery,  nevertheless 
our  men  got  into  the  stoclmdes  and  routed  those  who  held 
them.  In  this  affair  of  entering,  many  of  our  men  were 
wounded  and  two  or  three  killed,  but  it  was  at  the  cost  of 
many  Moors,  who  there  lost  their  lives ; and  Afonso  Balbo- 
querque,  seeing  himself  now  master  of  t¥e  bridge,  remained 
where  he  was  quietly  with  his  flag  and  a part  of  his  force, 
and  gave  orders  to  certain  of  the  Captains  to  go  and  take 
the  mosque,  and  to  others  to  attack  some  palisades  which 
the  Moors  had  set  up  at  the  mouth  of  a street  which  1^  to 
the  bridge,  and  that  neither  the  one  the  other 

should  leave  their  stations  without  his  bkpress  orders. 

When  the  Captains  arrived  at  the  palisades,  although  they 
met  with  some  amount  of  ylresistanoe,  yet  they  bore  them- 
iblves  so  valiantly  that  they  disoonifited  the  Moors  an^ 
gotppssession  of  tihe  works.  ^The  others,  however,  to  whose 
lot  it  fell  to  assault  the  mosque,  found  they  haK  a heavy  and 

i M seeJal,  JVoiif^ 


AFOirSO  DAtBOQTJfRQU*.  v 123 

troublesome  tssk  before  them^  for  in  that  place  of  defence 
there  was  the  King  with  a large  body  of  men  and  elephants, 
and  the  defen^  was  maintained  so  vigoronsly  that  a consider- 
able space  of  time  elapsed  without  our  n^n  being  able  to  got 
in.  Afonso  Dalboquerque,  seeing  from  the  bridge  the  circum- 
stances  in  which  our  men  were  situated,  made  his  way  with 
all  haste  at  the  head  of  all  his  forces  to  succour  them,  and 
because  at  the  mouth  of  a large  str^  which  led  to  the 
mosque,  where  he  was,  there  were  >iany  Moors  pressing 
on  the  flanks  of  certain  Captaiiis  that  were  following 
the  King,  who  was  in  flight  with  three  thousand  men 
armed  with  sh^ds,  he  stayed  himself  there  with  his  flag 
and  his  men,  and  sent  the  Captains  word  to  remain  quiet 
and  rally  towards  the  position  he  had  taken  up,  for  there 
were  yet  many  Moors  on  their  flanks,  and  then  they  with- 
drew at  once ; and  as  soon  as  the  junction  of  these  forces 
bad  been  carried  out,  Afonso  Dalboquerque  left  in  charge 
oyer  the  mosque  and  stockades  Jorge  Nunez  de  Lifto,  Nuno 
Yaz  de  Castelo-branco,  James  Teixeira,  and  Dinis  Fernandez 
de  Melo,  with  some  of  the  men,  while  he  himself,  with  the 
rest  that  remained,  returned  towards  the  bridge;  and  he 
ordered  the  Captains  who  were  stationed  on  one  side  and  on 
the  other  to  stay  where  they  were  and  not  fight  with  the 
Moors,  even  if  they  came  on  and  attacked  them,  until  he 
had  fortified  the  bridge ; and  ordered  four  large  barques 
^icb  he  had,  with  great  bombards,  to  pass  over  to  the  other 
side  and  sweep  the  field  on  one  side  and  on  the  other,  and » 
cause  l^he  Moors  to  keep  off  so  that  the  men  could  more 
securely  work  at  the  stockades ; and  having  arranged  this 
he  ordered  them  to  take  out  of  the  junk  all  the  munitions 
which  he  had  brought,  and  began  upon  the  stockades;  and 
CM  all  went  to  yrork  with  willing  hands,  in  a short  sppee  oi 
tapie  he  had  made  two  very  strong  palisades,  one  on  the  side 
of  the  city,  the  other  on  the  side  of  the  mosque,  with  barreb 
®led  with  earth,  and  wood,  and  be  arranged  in  them  many 


124 


COMMlKTAftII&  Of 


gnns : and  ordered  that  the  bridge  and  the  jnnk  should  be 
covered  with  palm  leaves,  for  the  benefit  of  the  men^  for  the 
sun  was  very  strong  and  he  was  fearful  lest  they  should  all 
fall  ill  from  the  hard  work  they  had  to  perform. 


GHAPTER  XXVIII. 

How  the  great  Afonso  Dalb6(|uerque  ordered  relief  to  be  given  to  our 
men  who  were  stationed  at  the  mouth  of  the  street  which  led  to 
the  bridge : and  how  Utamutaraja  and  Ninachatu,  and  other  mer- 
chants, seeing  the  overthrow  of  the  city,  came  and  placed  them- 
selves in  his  hands.  ^ 

While  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  was  thus  occupied 
in  this  eagerness  to  complete  the  fortification  of  the  stock- 
ades which  he  was  making  upon  the  bridge,  ho  saw  that  the 
Captains  whom  he  had  ordered  to  take  up  positions  at  the 
mouths  of  the  streets  were  undergoing,  rather  than  disobey 
his  commands,  much  discomfort  from  the  attacks  made  upon 
them  by  the  Moors  with  bombards  which  they  had  placed 
upon  the  terraces  of  their  houses,  and  with  matchlocks  with 
which  they  were  firing  upon  them,  so  he  dispatched  with 
great  haste  Caspar  de  Paiva,  Femao  Perez  Dandrade,  Pero 
Dalpoem,  Antonio  Dabreu,  who  was  now  by  this  time  well  of 
his  wound  in  the  jaw,  to  go  and  succour  them  with  ♦their 
men,  along  one  of  the  streets  of  the  city,  and  D.  Joao  de 
^Lima,  Aires  Pereira,  Simao  Dandrade,  Simao  Martinz,  and 
Simao  Afonso,  along  another  street  which  led  up  to  a place 
where  the  Moors  where  at  lance-thrusts  with  our  men,  and 
to  patrol  through  all  the  city  and  not  to  give  quarter  to  | 
single  person  they  met,  while  he  himself  would  come  on 
behind  them  in  support,  with  his  royal  «^dard;  and 
although  the  Moors  were  very  numerous,  the  Captains  ftll 
upon  them  so  valiantly  that,  .not  being  able  to  resist  tha< 
fury  of  the  onset  with  which  they  were  attacked,  they 


AfONSO"  OAiaOQUERQITlt. 


125 


turned  their  backs  an^  threw  themselves  into  flight,  and 
8ome^  indeed^  among  them,  who  were  nearest  to  oar  men, 
cast  themself 03  into  the  sea,  thinking  that  thereby  they 
ensured  their  safety. 

The  mariners,  whom  Afonso  Dalboquerquo  had  ordered 
to  man  the  skiffs  and  row  up  and  down  the  river,  came  up 
at  once  and  put  to  death  §vory  ono  whom  they  could  get  at; 
and  when  it  was  sundown  the  Captains  withdrew  to  the 
bridge,  where  they  now  had  their  i^bckades  very  strongly 
built  on  one  side  and  on  the  other,  and  Afonso  Dalbo- 
querque  took  up  his  quarters  in  the  middle,  and  they  passed 
the  whole  of  tljg  night  on  the  watch.  And  he  ordered  the 
Captains  of  the  barques  that  were  stationed  in  the  river  to 
keep  up  a continual  fire  upon  the  city  all  through  the  night 
with  their  bombards,  and  Pero  Gon^alvez,  chief  pilot,  to 
take  all  the  seamen  to  the  ships  to  sleep  there,  and  carryout 
the  same  instructions  regarding  the  cannonade,  and  in  this 
manner  they  remained  all  night.  And  it  was  a terrible 
thing  to  look  at  the  city,  for  on  account  of  the  constant 
firing  it  seemed  as  if  it  were  all  on  fire. 

When  morning  came,  the  Moors,  terrified  at  the  unex- 
pected misfortune  which  they  witnessed,  dared  not  appear 
in  the  street^  and  this  went  on  for  a period  of  ten  days 
running  without  any  cessation  by  night  or  by  day,  and 
durifcg  this  time  our  men  were  continually  spilling  the  blood 
of  the  Moors,  for  inasmuch  as  the  hunger  they  suffered  was 
extreme,  they  risked  their  lives  to  go  and  look  for  food  in* 
the  city,  and  there  they  lost  their  lives.  And  when  they 
perceived  the  troubles  that  had  fallen  upon  them,  and  the 
^reat  peril  they  were  in  of  losing  their  lives,  and  the  hope- 
lessness of  their  case,  some  began  to  come  to  Afonso  Dalbo-* 
qnerque  and#beg  for  mercy ; and  the  first  who  came  were 
the  P^gus,  and  these  he  received  very  kindly  and  gave 
them  a safeguard  to  enable  them  to  proseo  ute  their  voyage, 
and  permission  to  carry  with  thena  their  property/ and  in 


m 


COMMBVTiJtilS  Of 


liko  manner  he  allowed  all  the  merchants  who  came  from 
Cape  Comorim  to  the  eastwards,  who  had  no  ships  there, 
free  exportation  of  their  merchandize,  and  tjiey  began  to 
start  their  trade  agajn,  and  revive  the  navigation  from  their 
lauds  to  Malaca,  and  this  was  the  principal  reason  why  he 
did  so. 

Utemntaraja,  as  I have  already  said,  who  had  a safe- 
conduct  from  Afons^  Dalboquerque,  seeing  the  destruction 
of  the  city,  and  fearing  that  he  should  incur  displeasure 
because  his  son  had  gone  over  to  the  assistance  of  the  King 
against  our  men — although  indeed  he  was  well  rewarded  for 
it,  for  he  was  severely  wounded  and  many  ^ his  men  were 
killed — came  and  made  excuses  for  the  behaviour  of  his  son, 
making  a show  of  being  highly  delighted  at  the  ruin  which 
had  fallen  upon  the  King.  He  received  him  with  benignity, 
but  nevertheless  gave  orders  to  the  Captains  to  go  always 
armed  with  all  their  men,  and  keep  a good  look  out,  for 
there  could  be  no  reliance  placed  upon  him.  Ruy  de  Araujo, 
remembering  the  kindnesses  which  he  and  the  other  Christ- 
ians had  received  at  the  hands  of  Ninachatu,  a Hindoo  by 
nation,  during  their  captivity,  brought  him  to  Afonso  Dal- 
boquerque,  begging  that  he  would  show  him  favour  and 
honour  him,  for  he  could  not  repay  him  in  any  other  way  for 
the  kindness  of  the  treatment  he  bad  experienced.  Afonso 
Palboquerqne  entertained  him,  and  told  him  that  he  would 
promise,  before  he  left  for  India,  he  should  be  rewarded  in 
^accordance  with  what  Buy  de  Araujo  had  said  of  him. 

And  when  Afonso  Dalboquerque  foun^  himself  less 
troubled  by  the  uproars  which  the  Moors  caused  by  day 
and  night,  and  that  there  was  no  longer  in  the  city  any 
force  which  could  resist  them,  and  as  a recompense  for  pi^t 
labours,  he  gave  permission  t6  everyone  to  |ack  the  city, 
and  free  power  to  keep  or  dispose  of  everything  they  took> 
only  warning  them  not  to  touch  the  houses  or  the  subter- 


ITONSO  DAlJK>QniBaVf.  127  ^ 

mietti  atorehonaes^  of  Ninacbatn.  When  the  city  had  been 
Backed^  certain  merchants^  who  had  fled  away  to  their 
country  housedj  seeing  the  kind  way  in  which  Ninachatu 
had  been  treatedi  sent  and  begged  a safe>conduct  from 
Afonso  Dalboquerque  that  they  might  come  to  the  city;  and 
he  granted  this  to  all,  except  the  Malays,  who  were  natives 
of  the  country,  for  as  to  these  he  gave  orders  that  all  should 
be  put  to  death  whereao*ever  they  were  found.  ^ 

In  this  second  time  of  taking  the  city,  many  of  our  men 
were  wounded,  and  some  of  those  who  were  wounded  With 
poison  died,  but  all  the  others  were  cured,  because  Afonso 
Dalboquerque  ^ok  very  good  care  to  give  orders  for  their 
cure,  and  of  the  Moor8,women  and  children,  there  died  by 
the  sword  an  infinite  nuq;iber,  for  no  quarter  was  given  to 
any  of  them.  Three  thousand  pieces  of  artillery  were  taken, 
and  among  them  there  were  about  two  thousand  in  bronze, 
and  one  very  large  gun  which  the  King  of  Calicut  had 
sent  to  the  King  of  Malaca.  The  rest  were  of  iron,  of 
the  fashion  of  our  and  all  this  artillery  had  its  proper 

complement  of  carriages,  which  could  not  be  rivalled  even 
by  that  of  Portugal.  Large  matchlocks,  poisoned  blowing 
tubes,  bows,  arrows,  armour-plated  dresses,^  Javanese  lances, 
and  other  sorts  of  weapons,  it  was  marvellous  what  was 
taken,  besidesr  much  merchandize  of  every  kind. 

• 

> Guddes,  Storehouses  or  rooms  built  partly  above  and  partly  under  | 
ground.  For  example,  in  Correa’s  account,  when  Afonso  Dalboquerque  j 
laments  that  the  ^re  will  destroy  the  riches  of  the  city “ Se  o fogo 
nos  der  a cidade,  elle  levaii  todo  o bexn  que  ella  tern  de  riqueza,  com 
qm  a gente  ficaria  com  trabalho  e sem  proveito.”  Kuy  d’Araujo  Ihe 
Senhor,  posto  que  se  queime  Malaca,  inda  o milhor  ficaiA,  que 
«st4  nos  guddes,  que  e&o  coioe  de  pedra  fortes  e yneas  feitas  debaixo  do 
da  Indian  tom.  ii,  p.  286.  And  again,  during  the  progress 
of  thS  sacking : Os  capitftes,  oom'suas  quadrilhas  de  sens  nayios,  ajun- 
tavfto  e metifio  fate  em  grandes  casas  pera  depois  o mandarem  embarquar. 
Estas  fMendait  estavfto  em  casas  que  Hnhdo  mas  feitas  debaixo  do  chdo^ 
pef  cywi  argamastadas  por  resguardo^dofogo.^'-^lb.y  p.  247. 

* Lawkis  de  taminas. 


1S8  coMJimAEies  or 

All  and  more  which  I leave,  not  to  be  prolis^^  Afoti^ 
Dalboqaerqne  ordered  to  be  divided  among  iAie  Captains 
and  among  all  the  people  of  the  Fleet,  without  taking  any- 
thing for  himself,  except  six  large  lions  in  bronze  which  be 
took  for  his  tomb,  and  the  bracelet,  which  I have  alreii^y 
described,^  and  young  girls  of  all  the  races  of  that  country, 
and  some  toys,  all  which  he  took  to  send  them  to  the 
King  D.  Manuel  and, to  the  Queen  D.  Maria,  but  they  were 
lost  in  the  ship  Flor  do  la  Mar,  on  the  voyage  back  to  India, 
as  I shall  narrate  hereafter. 

Let  not  those  who  read  this  writing  be  astonished  when  I 
say  that  in  Malaca  were  taken  three  thousand  ^br  Ruy 
de  Araujo  and  Ninachatu  declared  to  Afonso  Dalboquerque 
that  there  were  eight  thousand  in  Jdalaca,  and  this  may  well 
bo  believed,  for  in  Malaca  were  much  copper  and  much  tin, 
and  the  gun  founders  were  as  good  as  those  of  Germany;  on 
the  other  hand,  the  city  was  a league  in  length,  and  when 
Afonso  Dalboquerque  disembarked  they  aimed  at  him  from 
on  all  sides,  whence  it  appears  that  even  this  number  was 
insignificant  in  comparison  to  what  was  required  for  the 
defence. 


CHAPTER  XXIX. 

* Of  how,  after  the  Prince  of  Malaca  had  withdrawn  from  his  father, 
he  came  to  the  river  of  Muar  and  fortified  himself  therein  with  a 
number  of  stockadee,  and  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  sent  a 
force  against  him,  and  put  him  to  ftight. 

The  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque,  being  desirous  of  setting 
the  affairs  of  Malaca  in  order,  determined  to  appoint  Nina- 
chatn,  because  he  was  a Hindoo,  GovernjilLfiLibe  Qoifetf 
' Se#t>P*  62. 

• In  the  view  of  Malaca  given  by  Correa,  Lendas  da  India  ^ vol.  ii,  p, 
250.  The  “ povoacfi  dos  quyllys”  U marked  on  the  Uft  of  the  city,  and 
separated  from  it  by  a palisade.  See  also  $upra^  p.  81,  note  1. 


AfONSO  SAtBOQtriEQITII.  129 

'*  • 

and  in  order  to  make  the  Moors  more  secure 
Ce  made  XJtemutaraja  their  principal  ohief^  and  with  these 
two  men,  as  they  were  prominent  persons,  the  people  began 
to  settle  down  quietly,  and  merchants,  a few  at  a time,  re*  i 
turned  to  the  city ; but  with  all  this  Afonso  Dalboquerque  1 
did  not  put  too  much  confidence  in  them,  especially  in 
Utemutaraja,  and  in  order  to  get  rid  of  this  suspicion  which 
he  had,  he  tried  all  he  could  to  get  the  king  into  his  hands, 
and  with  this  end  in  view  he  sent  many  boats  up  the  river 
and  along  the  coast  to  see  if  they  could  take  him. 

The  king,  owing  to  the  constant  alarms  which  arose 
every  d^,  and  knowing  the  desire  which  Afonso  Dalbo- 
querque had  of*  getting  possession  of  him,  fearing  lest  his 
own  people  should  deliver  him  up,  drew  himself  off  from 
the  city,  a day^s  journey,  taking  with  him  some  Malay  mer- 
ohanta  and  his  captains  and  governors  of  the  land,  with  the 
intention  of  keeping  in  that  neighbourhood,  waiting  for  his 
Lassamane,  the  Admiral  of  the  Sea,  whom  he  had  sent  to 
the  Island  of  Ling^*  to  convey  to  them  a numerous  fleet 
with  many  men,  and  in  their  company  the  King  of  that 
Island  who  was  called  Rajalingi,*  who  was  subject  to  him, 
with  determination  of  returning  against  the  city ; but  this 
did  not  come  to  pass,  for  the  Rajalingd,  knowing  that 
Afonso  Dalboqberque  was  in  possession  of  the  city,  did  not 
dare  io  oomej  and  the  King  of  Malaca,  being  of  the  opinion 
that  Afonso  Dalboquerque  simply  meant  to  rob  ^e  city  and  ' 
then  leave  it  and  sail  away  with  the  spoil  he  might  get  out 
of^it,  kept  aboftt  that  place  for  a space  of  ten  days,  in  ex- 
pectation of  the  issue  of  these  events.  But  when  he  was 
infomed  that  Afonso  Dalboquerque  was  beginning  to  estab- 
hsh  a fortress  of  timber^  wherein  to  shelter  himself,  and  so 
» See  vol.  ii,  p.  180,  note  2,  • 

t Hnga  Idandf  Sumatra,  0 deg.  10  min.  S.,  104  deg.  45  min.  E., 
lyhih  tP  of  Singapore. 

ig  evidently  but  a titli?,  Tho  Rajah  of  lingA**. 


130 


COKMIKTABISS  Of 


acting  as  to  shew  his  wish  to  make  a settlement  in  Malaca 
with  the  intention  of  maintaining  possession  of  it^  terrified 
at  this  news,  and  not  deeming  himself  safe  in  the  locality 
where  he  then  was,  he  went  further  off  into  the  interior 
country,  a distance  of  two  days^  march ; and  because  the 
party  was  sharply  pressed  for  want  of  provisions  the  Prince 
separated  himself  from  his  father  and  set  out  to  pitch  his 
settlement  close’ to  the  river,  and* there  he  marked  out  some 
very  strong  stockades,  and  barred  the  river  with  a quan- 
tity of  timber,  so  that  our  boats  might  not  pass  up  to  the 
place. 

As  soon  as  Afonso  Dalboquerque  was  informed  that  the 
Prince  of  Malaca  was  fortifying  his  position  on  the  river,  he 
despatched  Fermlo  Perez  Dandrado,  Simfto  Dandrade,  his 
brother,  Gaspar  de  Paiva,  Francisco  Sarram,  Aires  Pereira, 
Ruyde  Araujo,  and  Jorge  Nunez  do  Liao,  with  four  hundred 
Portuguese  soldiers,  and  six  hundred  Javanese  who  were 
given  for  tho  purpose  by  Utemutaraja,  and  the  P^gu  Cap- 
tains with  three  hundred  of  their  men,  to  take  boats  and 
launches  up  the  river  and  put  to  rout  that  nest  of  robbers 
which  was  beginning  to  form  itself  there,  and  they  did  so ; 
and  when  the  expedition  reached  the  stockade  which  the 
Prince  had  constructed,  they  began  to  root  it  up  with  ma- 
chines which  they  took  with  them  for  thiS  purpose,  and 
when  they  had  rooted  it  up,  they  pressed  on  to  attack  the 
enemy  at  their  fortifications. 

The  Prince,  when  he  saw  the  fleet  and  the  determined 
spirit  with  which  the  men  came  on,  struck Tiis  camp,  with” 
out  making  the  least  show  of  resistance,  and  fled  away  to 
the  place  wliere  tho  King  was,  which  was  about  a day^s 
journey  distant,  and  our  men  entered  in  pell-mell  into  their 
buildings,  and  captured  all  that  had  been  stored  there  which 
the  Prince  had  been  unable  to  remove ; am\)ng  their  spoil 
his  palanquins,  very  rich  and  gilded,  and  painted,  and  seven 
elephants,  with  their  castles  and  housings  ;,and  having  ob- 
tained this  victory  the  force  returned  to  the  city. 


ATOKSO  DALTOQUBEQUS. 


131 


When  the  Prince  reeohod  the  place  where  the  King  his 
ihther  was,  there  arose  differences  between  them  concemiog 
the  loss  of  Malaoa,  each  one  seeking  to  put  off  the  fault 
from  his  own  to  the  other^a  shoulders,  and  this  dissension 
ran  so  high,  that  being  thus  divided  in  plans,  and  suffering 
also  from  the  discomforts  of  famine,  they  departed  and 
shaped  their  journey  for  the  kingdom  of  Pfto,  through  a 
region  desert  and  marshy/  mounted  upon  their  elephants 
with  their  wives  and  children,  taking  with  them  fifty  men 
whom  they  forced  to  accompany  them  in  their  flight. 


CHAPTER  XXX. 

How  tbe  King  of  Malaca,  after  the  Portuguese  had  gained  the  oity  from 
him,  withdrew  to  the  kingdom  of  PSo,  and  dispatched  an  Ambaaeador 
to  the  K-iug  of  China,  begging  for  succour. 

The  King  of  Malaca,  having  arrived  at  the  kingdom  of 
Pfto,  and  seeing  that  there  was  no  remedy  for  his  misfor- 
tunes, determined  to  dispatch  an  Ambassador  to  tlie  King 
of  China,  begging  for  succour,  that  ho  might  bo  enabled  to 
recover  the  city  which  he  had  lost,  reminding  him,  with  the 
object  of  obtaining  a favourable  reply  to  this  request,  of  the 
ancient  friondsdiip  which  the  Kings  of  Malaca  had  always 
kept  lip  with  those  of  China,  and  of  the  obedience  which 
they  had  shown  them  as  their  vassals ; and  in  order  to  give  • 
a greater  appearance  of  authenticity  to  this  embassy,  he 
desired  that  it  l^honld  be  accompanied  by  one  of  his  undos, 
whose  name  was  TuiW  Nacem  J^daliar,  in  w hom  he  re- 
posed  the  highest  confidence ; and  ho,  after  receiving  his 
order  to  depart,  went  and  proceeded  to  embark  at  the  river 
of  Mttar,^  whence  he  set  sail  in  a junk  with  his  wife,  accom- 
panied with  (Certain  Moors  in  his  retinue;  and  when  he 

» This  k the  comman  Malay  wor4  for  Lord  or  Master. 

• The  river  in  Malaca,  on  which  oity  of  Pahang  or  Pao  is  built. 

^ |C2 


132 


COVUSHTABlflS  Of 


reached  the  city  of  Cantfto/  which  is  the  port  of  China 
whither  all  those  who  sail  to  those  parts  are  accustomed  to 
make  land,  the  Governors  of  that  city — in  accordance  with 
the  ancient  custom  which  they  keep  up — immediately  sent  off 
a messenger  to  thelCing,  who  was  in  the  interior  a distance 
of  a hundred  and  eighty  leagues,  giving  him  notice  of  the 
arrival  of  the  Ambassador  of  the  King  of  Malaoa,  and  ask- 
ing that  word  of  the  King's  pleasure  as  to  what  should  bo 
done  might  be  sent,  for  tho  custom  of  China  is  that  not 
a single  stranger  can  pass  beyond  that  port  nor  go  to  the 
King  without  his  permission. 

Tho  messenger  whom  the  Governor  despatched  reached 
the  city  of  Pequim,-  where  the  king  was,  find  delayed  on 
the  journey  two  months,  and  then  returned  with  the  reply 
to  the  Governors,  to  the  eflbct  that  they  were  to  permit  the 
ambassador,  with  the  rotinuo  in  his  company,  to  pass  through 
the  kingdom,  and  to  give  them  everything  that  they 
required  for  their  journey.  When  the  ambassador  received 
this  reply,  he  lost  no  time  in  making  his  preparations,  and 
set  out  with  his  wife  on  tho  road  for  the  Royal  Court,  and 
kept  continually  traversing  along  tho  bank  of  a river*  whei'o 
there  were  veiy  noble  cities  and  very  sumptuous  edifices, 
of  which  I do  not  treat  because  it  has  nothing  to  do  with 
this  history.  On  the  arrival  of  the  ambassadCr  at  the  Court, 
he  was  very  well  received  by  all  the  Lords  and  Governors 
of  the  land ; and  after  some  days  had  elapsed  the  King 
desired  to  receive  him  in  person,  although  this  was  not  his 
usual  custom,  for  no  one  sees  him,  and  bftsiness  is  trans- 
acted by  the  men  who  govern  the  land.  And  after  tha 
ambassador  had  performed  his  courtesy  to  the  King  after 

> Canton,  or  Quangtung,  23  deg.  12  min.  N.,  113  deg.  17  min.  B. 

• Pekin,  or  Shun-tien,  China,  39  deg.  68  min.  N.,  116  deg.  29 
min.  E. 

* This  probably  refers  to  the  Yatig-tsse-kiang,  which  is  connected  by 
the  Yutt-ho,  Sha-ho,  or  Grand  Can^l,  with  the  Yun-ho,  or  Eu-ho  River, 
on  a branch  of  which  tho  city  of  Pekin  is  boilt. 


183 


4FOK80  DAtBOgUKBQUS. 

th0  a^d  custom  of  the  Ohincae,  ho  threw  himself  at 

the  King’s  feet^  and  with  many  tears  begged  him  that  he 
would  be  pleased  to  assist  the  King  his  lord  in  his  present 
trouble,  for  in  him  ho  placed  all  his  confidence. 

The  King  ordered  him  to  rise,  and  told  him  to  relate 
all  the  history  of  the  affair  in  order.  He  related  it  to  him, 
for  he  had  been  an  eyewitness  of  it  all,  and  told  him  that 
the  King  his  lord,  after  he  had  been  overcome,  had  retired 
to  the  kingdom  of  Pfto,  and  there  he  remained  waiting,  in 
the  hopes  that  he  (the  King  of  China)  would  turn  a favour- 
able ear  to  him,  and  assist  him,  with  men  and  a fleet,  to 
recover  possession  of  the  kingdom,  to  be  revenged  for  the 
affronts  which  the  Captain  of  the  King  of  Portugal  had 
given  himj  and  although  the  King  of  China  had  already 
been  informed,  by  the  Chinese  who  had  como  from  Malaca, 
of  all  that  had  taken  place,  he  was  glad  to  hear  the  ambas- 
sador, and  be  enquired  very  particularly  of  him  concerning 
the  person  and  authority  of  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquorque 
and  of  the  Portuguese,  what  sort  of  men  they  were,  and 
what  was  their  manner  of  fighting. 

The  ambassador,  as  he  was  a discreet  man,  gave  him  a 
very  good  account  of  everything,  whereat  he  was  very  well 
satisfied.  And  when  these  conversations  were  over,  the 
King^told  him  to  go  and  enjoy  himself,  for  he  would  dis- 
patch him  and  do  everything  that  ho  wished,  but  really  bo 
was  unwilling  to  give  his  word  that  he  would  help  the  King 
of  Malaca,  forjhiis  intentions  and  desires  were  to  keep  on 
fedondly  terms  with  the  King  of  Portugal  and  with  his 
Captain  Afonso  Dalboquerque,  and  to  send  some  persons  to 
visit  him,  as  well  because  of  the  great  news  which  ho  had  of 
his  person,  as  also  because  of  the  good  treatment  that  he 
had  shewn  to  the  Chinese  whom  he  had  found  in  the  port 
of  Malaca,  and  his  desire  to  open  the  commerce  in  his 
land.  And  one  thing  which  greatly  helped  this  policy  of 
^ tho  King  of  China  was  the  complaints  which  the  Chinese 


184 


COHHBKTABIEB  OV 


merchants  made  of  the  tyrannies  that  the  King  of  Malaoa 
had  practised  upon  them  in  the  matter  of  their  merchandise^ 
in  the  time  when  they  were  in  his  territory. 

The  ambassador,  spent  a long  time  at  the  Court  with- 
out being  able  to  got  dispatch  of  his  bnsiness,  and 
during  this  time  his  wife  died;  and  after  some  days  had 
elapsed  the  King  replied  to  him,  through  the  officials, 
excusing  himself  from  granting  the  succour  which  was 
asked  of  him,  and  giving  his  reasons  why  he  could  not  do 
it,  and  the  chief  reason  was  the  war  that  was  on  hand 
against  the  Tartars.  With  this  reply  the  ambassador  set 
out  without  loss  of  time,  and  when  he  arrived  at  the  city  of 
Janquileu,  and  bethought  himself  of  the  unfortunate  result 
of  his  mission  and  of  his  departed  wife,  he  died  of  sheer 
grief,  having  given  orders  to  build  a chapel  for  his  inter- 
ment in  the  outskirts  of  the  city,  and  therein  he  lies  buried 
in  a sepulohre  surrounded  by  steps  of  lateen,  on  which  he 
ordered  an  inscription  to  be  placed,  which  reads ; Here 
lies  Tado  Nacem,  Amhasaadm  and  Uncle  of  the  great  King  of 
MaUtca,  wh&m  death  carried  off  before  he  could  he  avenged 
n'pon  the  Ca/ptaln  Afonso  Dalloquerqve,  lion  of  the  sea 
robbers/^ 


CHAPTER  XXXL 

How  the  King  of  Malaca,  having  arrived  at  the  kingdom  of  Pao,  died ; 
and  how  the  great  Afoneo  Dolboquerque  began  do  build  the  fort- 
ress ; and  the  inscription  which  he  placed  over  the  gate  after  it  was 
finished,  and  what  passed  hereupon.  v- 

As  disasters  kept  following  this  ill-fated 
Fortune  not  being  content  with  placing  hiin  Ih  the 
of  losing  his  city,  wife,  children  and  peopl^  dishearten^ 
and  deeply  chagrined  at  his  losses,  after  he  had  arrived  but 
a few  days  at  the  kingdom. of  Pfto,  he  died.  When  the 
King  was  dead,  all  the  Htfoors  of  honourable  estate,  who  had  * 


iJPOjrSO  DiJLBQQUSRQUE. 


135 


followed  bis  fortune,  scattered  themselves  through  the  forests 
there,  and  after  the  lapse  of  some  days  came  down,  seek- 
ing to  get  to  the  sea  coast,  and  sent  to  beg  permission  from 
Afonso  Dalboquerque  that  they  might  return  to  their  city  ; 
and  to  some  of  them,  who  were  men  oF  principal  power,  he 
granted  permission,  for  he  considered  it  was  more  prudent 
to  have  such  men  as  these  within  the  city,  than  that  thoy 
should  be  going  about  outside,  stirring  up  assemblies  and 
inciting  the  merchants  not  to  come  to  the  port ; he  there- 
fore commanded  the  Javanese  to  band  themselves  together 
and  scour  the  land,  and  bring  back  captive  all  the  Malays 
found  in  the  woods  there,  to  work  at  the  building  of  tho 
fortress  which  he  was  anxious  to  begin;  and  if  among  those 
captives  any  one  should  chance  to  bo  found  who  could  bo 
recognised  as  having  taken  a guilty  part  in  the  massacre  of 
the  men  forming  the  company  of  Diogo  Lopez  de  Sequeira, 
Afonso  Dalboquerque  commanded  that  proper  punishment 
be  meted  out  to  him,  and  that  tho  others,  with  iron  chains 
upon  them,  should  serve  at  tho  work. 

And  in  company  with  them  there  were  brought  to  him 
one  thousand  five  hundred  slaves  who  had  belonged  to  the 
king,  with  their  women  and  children,  and  he  took  them  all 
as  captives  of  the  King  D.  Manuel,  just  as  they  bad  been 
of  the  King*  of  Malaca,  and  ordered  that  they  should  be 
supplied  with  wages  and  provisions  when  they  worked  at 
the  building,  in  accordance  with  the  native  custom;  and 
when  they  were  not  thus  required  to  servo  they  worked  for 
^ jjheir  own  acfvantago,  for  after  this  manner  they  had  been 
compelled  to  serve  the  King  of  Malaca ; and  when  he  bad 
thus  arranged  these  matters,  he  ordered  them  to  take  off 
from  tho  fortress  the  timbei*^  and  woodwork  which  it  carried 
for  the  protection  of  the  men  who  were  employed  on  the 
work,  and  (o  make  ready  lime,  stone,  and  masonry  for  a 
beginning;  and  although  Ruy  de  Araujo  never  expected 
io  be  able  to  find  sufficient  ptone  to  build  tho  fortress,  yel 
* S«e  p.  129. 


COMMEHTAEIEB  OF 


m 

the  will  of  our  Lord  that  the  Portuguese  should., 
li^e  good  their  sottlomont  in  that  city,  and  that  His  name 
should  there  be  worshipped,  so  great  a quantity  6f  stono 
tod  masonry  was  discovered  in  some  ancient  sepulchres 
of  bygone  kings,  which  wore  situated  on  the  land ‘beneath 
the  surface  of  the  ground,  and  in  the  mosques  that  were 
thrown  down,  that  two  fortresses  might  well  have  b^n  con- 
structed ; and  now^  as  there  were  plenty  of  helping  hands 
to  begin  the  work,  and,  many  labourers,  Afonso  Dalbo- 
.querque  gave  orders  to  open  out  the  foundations,  and  he 
founded  a very  strong  fortress,  the  foundation  filled  in  to 
fte  depth  of  a war  lance,  for  the  position  ^f  the  ground 
required  it  to  bo  so,  with  two  wells  of  very  good  water 
within  the  precincts  for  drinking  purposes,  that  were  there 
already  built  with  worked  stone  masonry. 

And  in  order  that  our  men,  who. were  within  the  fortress, 
might  be  able  to  rally  together  for  defence,  if  it  were 
necessary,  whenever  they  so  desired,  without  the  enemy 
being  able  to  cut  them  off,  be  laid  the  foundation  of  a keop^  of 
four  storey^s  height  along  the  sea,  so  that  also  from  its  height 
they  might  with  their  artillery  defend  a hill  which  the 
fortress  has  over  against  it,  which  commands  its  position, 

Now  because  it  may  be  that  some  who  read  this  history 
may  find  fault  with  building  a fortress  in  an  enepy's 
country  with  such  a weak  point,  the  answer  is  that  Afonso 
l)alboquerque  put  up  with  the  commanding  position  of  this 
hill  because  there  was  not  in  the  whole  of  the  city  a more 
commodious  place  for  tho  security  of  the  captain  knd  the^f 
forces  that  might  be  placed  therein,  for  alongside  of  this 
tower  one  of  our  ships  of  two  hundred  tons  burden  could 
come  whenever  it  was  desired.  And  they  called  the  fortress 
**  A FamoBa^^j  ie,,  The  Fam6u8,^'  And  as  I hiM'e  been 
told  by  many  persons  who  have  seen  it,  it  seems  ibo  have 
been  very  appropriately  so  called ; but  I do  not  give  a 
• Torre  de  Akjiiagem;  see  vol.  i,  p.  45. 


AFONSO  DALBOaUBHQUE. 


137 


Special  accounj:  of  its  details  of  construction  because  it  is 
very  much  frequented  by  our  Fortug'uese.  And  because 
Afonso  Dalboqnerque  was  very  rnucli  devoted  to  Our  Lady 
he  ordered  the  men  to  build  a church,  to  which  he  gave  the 
name  of  Noasa  8enhom  da  Anturncthda^^  i.c.,  ^^Our  Lady 
of  the  Anuuiiciation/^  And  in  order  that  the  memory  of 
the  persons 'who  had  taken  part  in  iho  conquest  of  this 
kingdom  and  foundation  of  the  fortress  might  remain  for 
ever,  lie  ordered  them  to  make  a very  lai’ge  stone  slab, . 
upon  which  were  insenbed  the  mimes  of  all  the  principal 
men.  But,  the  Portuguese  are  by  nature  envious  of  honour, 
they  would  not,  therefore,  sutler  Afonso  JDalboquorquo  to 
make  more  account  of  one  than  of  another,  seeing  that  all 
were  equally  meritorious  in  the  work,  and  in  the  conquest 
of  that  city  ; and  ho,  in  order  not  to  give  them  cause  for  dis- 
pleasure, and  yot  not  to  abaiidoii  that  wliich  ho  had  done, 
gave  orders  that  the  stone  should’  bo  act  up  over  the  gate- 
way with  the  inscribed  names  turned  to  tho  wali,  and  on 
the  back  of  the  slab  that  viuse  of  David,  which  says:  ^^La- 
HDEM  QUEM  RErCOBAVOUNT  EniyiCANTES,^'  that  IS,  Tho  ' 
stone ‘ which  the  builders  refused/’ 


cnAPTh:ii  xxxii. 

Ilow  ttio  gi’eut  Afonso  Palboqnri’que,  fit  the  request  of  iho  (Jovornors 
and  peo})le  of  llu;  city,  onlered  inoiioy  to  be  coined ; itud  of  tbo 
value  thereof  and  of  the  rest  that  was  done  therca)»on. 

While  tho  affairs  of  Malaca  wei’e  in  tliis  state,  Ninacluitu 
came  to  the  great  Afonso  Dalboqucrque  with  tho  Governors 
of  tho  land,  and  declared  to  him  that  the  people  wore  suffer- 
ing great  inconvenience  from  tlie  want  of  a currency,  and 
they  begged  Kie  would  of  his  graciousness  give  orders  for 
some  system  of  coinage ; ain^  although  ho  had  already  for 
‘ Psalm  cxviii,  22  LmA/.). 


138 


COMMENTARIES  OF 


many  days  desired  this  himself,  yet^  as  the  work  of  building 
the  fortress  occupied  the  whole  of  this  time,  he  had  put  this 
matter  off  to  a more  fitting  opportunity,  when  he  should 
have  less  to  occupy  his  attention ; yet  because  the  necessity 
which  they  represented  to  him  was  very  urgent,  and  the 
people  could  not  improve  their  condition  without  a currency, 
he  desired  to  set  to  work  and  arrange  the  matter  without 
loss  of  any  more  tjme,  as  well  because  it  was  a royal  privi- 
lege of  the  King,  D.  Manuel,  and  of  his  victory  in  a kingdom 
newly  acquired,  whereof  he  was  by  right  the  king^  so  also 
in  order  to  withdraw  and  suppress  the  coinage  of  the  Moors, 
and  cast  their  root  and  their  name  out  of  the^land. 

Having  made  up  his  mind  concerning  this,  Afonso  Dalbo- 
querquo  ordered  that  all  the  merchants,  governors,  and 
principal  men  of  the  city  should  be  called  together,  and 
held  a conversation  with  them  respecting  their  desires  ex- 
pressed to  him ; and  after  many  different  opinions  had  been 
given  by  them  all,  they  agreed  to., the  opinion  of  all  the 
captains  who  were  there  present,  that  a coinage  should  bo 
made,  and  that  out  of  two  caixes,^  which  was  a pewter  coin 
of  the  King  of  Malaca,  should  be  struck  a coin  with  the 
sphere^  of  the  King  D.  Manuel,  to  which  they  gave  tho 
name  of  dirikeiro  money),  and  another,  of  greater  size, 
which  ^as  worth  ten  dinheiroSy  they  termed  soldo/  and 
utiiers,  which  weighed  ten  soldos,  they  entitled  lasiardos ; 
and  all  this  money  was  of  pewter,  which  is  found  native  in 
tho  land  of  Malaca,  and  tho  mines  of  this  metal  he  made 
direct  Grown  property  of  the  King  of  Portugal, 

And  because  there  was  not  in  Malaca  any  gold  or  silver 
coinage,  but  trade  was  carried  on  by  barter  of  one  kind  of 
merchandise  for  another,  they  agreed  that  there  should  be 

^ Maimonidca,  Gezelah,  5.  ^‘Ubicunque  nuraisma  itlicujus  regi»  oh- 
ti  net,  illic  incol®  regem  istum  pro  domiho  agnoscimt,”  Quoted  by  Farrar, 
JAfe  of  Christ,  ii,  2JJ2,  n,  • • See  p.^77. 

* Esjma,  see  vol.  ii,  p.  12g.  * Cf.  Lat.  Solidus ; Fr.  Sou.  \ 


AFONSO  DALBOQUERQUP^. 


139 


such  a coinage ; and  after  much  disputation  concerning  the 
value  that  should  be  assigned  to  it,  the  opinion  which  found 
favour  with  everyone  was  that  the  gold  coin  should  weigh 
a quarter  of  a tundid,  which  is  worth  among  us  a thousand 
rets,  and  to  this  they  gave  the  name  of  GathoUco ; and  tho 
silver  coin  the  merchants  thought  well  to  bo  that  of  Pegu, 
which  is  somewhat  less  than  that  of  Castoleto,  but  upon 
this  point  there  were  several  opinions  given  on  both  sides ; 
but  Afonso  Dalboquerquo  appointed  that  this  coin  should 
be  made  of  merchantable  silver,  so  that  if  the  Kings  of 
Portugal  should  desire  to  send  silver  for  sale  to  Malaca,  on 
account  of  t^e>high  value  it  would  fetch,  they  could  do  so. 

The  mercuants,  although  this  higli  value  of  the  silver  was 
against  them,  assented  to  tho  opinion  expressed  by  Afonso 
Dalboquerque,  and  agreed  that  tho  silver  coin  should  be 
called  MalaqimeSj  Le.,  Malaca  pieces,  and  should  have  the 
same  value  of  a quarter  of  tnndla;  and  in  order  that  cur- 
rency of  the  coinage  of  tho  Moors  might  be  immediately 
stopped  everywhere,  especially  that  of  pewter,  which  was 
the  most  common  in  use  in  the  land,  Afonso  Dalboquerque 
gave  orders  for  the  establishment  of  a house  for  the  mint, 
and  that  all  [_the  Moors  who  hold  com  of  tho  King  of 
Malaca  should  convey  it  thither  without  delay  under  })ain 
of  degith ; and  so  great  a quantity  of  money  was  thus  carried 
there  out  of  fear  of  the  penalty  which  had  been  appointed 
to  them,  that  tho  officers  could  not  dispatch  their  business  ' 
fast  enough,  apd  in  a short  time  a great  quantity  of  silver, 
geld,  and  copper  had  been  recoined.^ 

^ Correa’s  description  of  the  ooinago  difFurs  in  some  respeets  from  this 
text.  He  says : — Em  Malaca  nom  corria  ueuliuma  moeda  d’ouro  nem 
de  prata,  porque  todo  se  coinpraua,  e vendia,  as  merendorias  hiimas  a 
troqo  o as  miudezas  do  bAzar  do  comer  se  oompraurio  per  huma 

d’estariW,  u <iae  <?baman.ic  edayris.  0 (Joneniador  mandou 
laurar  moeda  (way  miudv,  e outra  do  kUz  a que  pds  uomo 
bastardos,  o de  hum  lado  a espera  e^de  oidro  hum  A Fez  moeda 

d’ouro  de  valia  do  mil  e corenta  reaes,  e n’eila  huam  moa  iiegura  de  Key 


140 


COMMENTARIES  OF 


When  Afonso  Dalboquorquo  had  been  informed  by  the 
officials  as  to  the  quantity  of  coin  which  they  had  in  hand, 
ho  ordorod  tho  Governors  of  the  land  to  bo  summoned,  and 
told  him  that  he  had  given  orders  for  minting  a large  sum 
of  money,  in  accordance  with  the  advice  of  every  one,  and 
that  it  was  necessary  to  send  forth  a proclamation  concern- 
ing it  throughout  the  city  with  that  solemnity  which  belonged 
to  the  estate  of  the  King  D.  Manuol  his  lord.  The’Governors 
agreed  that  upon  tho  morning  of  the  following  day  the 
change  in  tho  currency  should  bo  proclaimed,  and  all  tho 
principal  men  of  tho  people  met  together,  and  made  their 
way  to  tho  fortress,  where  Afonso  DalboquQj’que  was  with 

cow  coroa,  e huma  eh’|*a<1<a  na  wflo,  e lotras  (|ucdizittO  derrador,  com  esta 
CON  till  isTAOA  K ('<AMiAi>A,  c du  ouiju  purto  o cscudo  dus  «j[uina8,  e 
letr;i8  derrador  quo  diziao,  Gcouia  veua  Sempue  Mkmoria.  A esta 
mooda  pOs  nonie  catolioa,  e d'eata  foz  iiusot’  catalicoa  de  pre<;-o  do  quiu- 
hoiitoH  c vinto  roaea,  a (pie  j)6m  de  huma  parte  a e.q)era  eom  letras  quo 
diziiio,  Kai’ERA  fai  Dkos  pkra  mais,  o da  outra  bauda  o A grego,  e 
Ictras  quo  diziiio,  O erouavo  ganiia  feua  o senhou.  Estas  moedas 
lauiadaH  cr:To  niny  fermosas,  de  <|ue  uiaudou  laurar  hurna  soma*  E fez 
moeda  <le  jiirata  de  setecentos  e vint«  ri  aes,  do  Iwma  bauda  as  quinas 
new  coroa,  e da  outra  tianda  espera  com  as  mesiuas  letras,  quo  oliamou 
reaes  brancos,  e moos  reaes.”— .Tom.  ii,  p.  256.  From  this  extract  we 
get  the  following  values : — 

10  Sold  os  ~ 1 Bastardo  (pewter). 

1,040  rems  1 Catholico  (gold). 

020  reacs  — 1 half  Catholico  (gold). 

720  renes  — 1 real  brancOy  «.e.,  white  real  (silver). 


Scheme  of  the  Portuguese  Coinage  OFi Malaga. 
deduced  from  the  foregoing  text. 

PEWTER, 


2 Caixes^  or  Cash  ~ 1 Espera  — - 1 Dinheiro. 
lO  Binhnros  = 1 Soldo, 

10  Snldos  = 1 Bastardo, 


SILVER, 

1 Malaquese  =:  | Tundia. 

COLO. 

1 f'utholico  Tumlia 1000  Reis  (Portugues^, 


* AFONSO  DAL]iU<4UB.BViuj^. 


all  the  Captains,  Fidalgos,  and  Cavaliors  of  the  Fleet,  and 
from  that  placS  they  began  their  procession  in  the  following 
order. 

There  went  first,  in  front  of  all  tho  people,  one  of  tho 
principal  Governors  of  the  City  mounted  upon  an  elephant 
with  his  castle  caparisoned  with  silk,  and  carrying  in  his 
hands  a flag  of  tho  arins  of  the  King  of  Portugal  upon  a 
long  spear,  and  behind  hi;n  wont  all  tho  people  on  foot  on 
one  side  and  the  other,  as  it  were  in  a procession ; and  in 
the  midst  of  these  people  there  wont  a Moor  mounted  upon 
another  elephant,  likewi so  caparisoned  with  silk,  making  the 
proclamation;  and  behind  this  one  came  tho  trumpets;  and 
after  them  tlo^'GovGrnors  of  tho  City,  and  all  tho  Merchants, 
and  principal  men  thereof ; and  at  tlie  rear  of  this  throng 
there  went  Antonio  do  Sousa  tho  son  of  Joilo  do  Sousa  of 
Santarem,  and  tho  son  of  ISiinachatu,  both  together  upon  a 
largo  elephant,  which  had  been  kept  for  tho  King^s  own  use, 
with  his  castle  ca])arisoned  with  brocaded  cloths,  and  they 
carried  with  thorn  a large  quantity  of  gold,  silver,  and  cop- 
per coin,  which  they  kept  on  throwing  out  over  the  heads  of 
all  the  people  at  each  publication  of  tho  proclamation  which 
the  Moor  mado.  The  crowd  was  so  great  that  the  streets 
could  scarcely  contain  it,  and  with  many  songs  nnd  blowing 
of  horns,  accoi'<ling  to  the  native  custom,  tho  people  gave 
great*  praise  to  Afonso  Dalboquerquo  for  giving  orders  for 
this  distribution  of  money  by  the  advice  and  in  accordance  , 
with  the  opinions  of  their  natives. 

When  the  publication  of  this  money  was  finished  tho 
Pegus  begged  permission  of  Afonso  Dalboqucrvjuo  to  depart 
to  their  own  country,  and  ho  granted  it  to  them,  and  shewed 
them  groat  honour  and  kindness,  whereat  they  were  very 
pleased,  and  gave  him  great,  thanks  for  wliat  he  had  done 
for  them  whcNi  the  city  was  sacked,  in  not  permitting  that 
their  houses  and  merchandise  should  bo  i-obbod,  which 
indeed  was  of  no  small  impcfrtance,  for  it  amounted  to  a 


142 


C0MM2NTiBIBS  OF 


thousand  of  gold,  apart  from  the  sums  of  gold  and 

silver  which  they  had  concealed. 

When  Afonso  Dalboquerque  had  taken  his  leave  of  them, 
they  set  forth  promising  him  that  they  would  very  soon  re- 
turn to  that  port  with  much  merchandise,  and  would  en- 
deavour to  bring  him  a very  largo  junk,  which  was  being 
built  in  their  country  for  the  King  of  Malaca.  And  there 
remained  behind  in  Malaca  one*  of  the  sous  of  tho  Pilot,  a 
youth  of  good  breeding,  with  a hundred  Pegiis,  and  he 
learned  our  Portuguese  languagej  and  he  was  so  curious  to 
see  everything  that  the  principal  reason  why  ho  stayed  be- 
hind was  to  see  our  fortress  completed,  and  he  was  always 
at  work  upon  it  with  his  men,  whom  Afonso  P'alboqiiorque 
ordered  to  be  liberally  repaid  for  their  labour. 

Of  this  gold  which  I have  spoken  of  above  as  coming  to 
Malaca,  tho  larger  part  comes  from  a mine  of  Menamoabo, 
which  is  at  the  extremity  of  the  island  of  Sumatra,  on  tho 
southern  side,  fronting  opposite  to  Malaca,  a sea  voyage  of 
six  days’  distance,  and  it  also  cornea  from  the  kingdom  of 
Pile,  and  in  all  the  islands  round  about  Malaca  there  is  gold, 
jut  only  a little.  Tho  Gores  and  the  Chinese  also  bring  it. 
The  silver  comes  from  the  kingdom  of  Siao,  and  from  the 


1 Koquetto,  who  givea  tho  forms— metical^  medegal^  and 
mtuV/a/,— considers  this  to  be  an  Asiatic  weight  of  one  druclim  and  a half 
for  pearls,  amber,  etc. 

Bluteau  describes  the  Matical  or  Metical^  as  a coin  or  weight  of  gold, 
current  in  Mozambique,  and  worth  480  reis,  according  to  .loao  dos 
Santos  in  the  Ethiopia,  fol.  53,  col.  3;  and  records  thafin  the  same  place 
the  above  historian  speaks  of  quatorze  maticatjs  que  sao  seis  mil  e seis 
centos  reis’’;  from  this  latter  pas.««ige  we  may  deduce  nearly  472  nia  to  the 
metical.  Under  metical,  Bluteau  quotes  two  passages  from  Portuguese 
authors : (i)  Jo^o  de  Barros,  JJecada  i,  68,  2,  to  the  c4Tect  that  30  mc- 
ticah  are  equal  to  about  14,000  reis,.  This  would  give  only  466 J reis  to 
the  metical,  (ii)  DamUo  de  Goes,  fol.  23,  c.  4,  tha^  each  metical  is 
worth  240  reaes  da  nossa  moeda.  If  the  real  is  equal  to  two  reis,  this 
value  of  the  metical  agrees  with  that  assigned  to  it  above  by  Joao  dos 
Santoa.  * 


' A?0N80  DAtBOQUERQUB. 


kingdom  of  Pegii,  where  there  aro  many  mines  of  it,  and 
its  quality  is  as  good  as  that  of  Casteleto, 


CHAPTER  XXXlir. 

How  the  merchants  and  all  the  noble  Moors  of  tlio  city  complained  to 
the  great  Afonso  Dalboqucrqhe  of  the  tyrannies  which  Mtemutaraja 
exercised  in  the  land,  an<l  how  he  bad  in  his  jower  all  the  supplies, 
and  of  many  other  things  which  he  did. 

When  some  days  had  elapsed,  after  tho  fortress  was  raised 
to  such  a height  that  it  could  defend  itself  against  its  ene- 
mies, they  cauio  from  time  to  time  to  declare  to  the  great 
Afonso  Dalboquerque  that  Utomutaraja  was  planning  some 
treachery  in  concert  with  the  King  Alnoadim,  who  had  suc- 
ceeded to  tho  kingdom  after  the  death  of  his  father  King 
Mahamet,  who  had  died  in  PSo,  as  I have  already  related, 
with  the  intention  of  rising  up  in  conjunction  against  us, 
and  for  the  better  proof  of  this  matter  they  gave  him  a 
letter  which  tho  Utemutaraja  had  written  to  the  King,  and 
the  reply  to  it 

The  substance  of  this  letter  was  U temutaraja^s  excuses  to 
the  King  for  tho  friendship  ho  had  made  with  Afonso  Dal- 
boquerquo,  and  the  obedience  ho  had  shown  to  tho  same, 
giving'many  reasons  and  excuses  for  the  course  he  had  pur- 
sued, and  offering  in  it  his  own  person  and  his  men  to  help 
the  King  if  ho  is  determined  to  attack  tlie  city  of  Malaca, 
witji  all  his  household  and  possessions,  relatives  and  friends, 
making  very  light  of  this  business  because  of  tho  smallness 
of  our  forces.  Afouso  Dalboquerquo  kept  this  within  him- 
self without  giving  account  of  it  to  any  one,  and  from  that 
time  forward  showed  to  Uteiputaraja  much  good-will ; and 
Utemutaraja,  considering  this  favourable  treatment  which 
ho  experienced,  and  vainly  imagining  that  Afonso  Dalbo- 
querqifie  was  not  cognisant  of  the  treachery  in  which  he  was 


144 


COMMKNTARIES  09 


engaged,  began  to  act  with  some  little  effrontery  in  the 
government  of  tho  iund,  and  gave  opportunity  to  the  Moors 
who  lived  in  his  district  of  Dupe  to  make  use  of  their  own 
coinage,  and  prevented  ours  from  being  current;  and 
although  Utemutaraja  had  been  present,  in  his  position  as  a 
principal  personage,  when  it  was  agreed  that  this  coinage 
of  money  should  be  made,  nevertheloss  neither  he,  nor 
his  sons,  grandsons,  nor  relatives,  would  bo  present  at 
the  formal  proclam atinn  of  the  change  of  currency  ; where- 
fore it  was  that  Afonso  Dall)(1querque  did  not  place  any 
very  great  reliance  on  his  protestations  of  friendship,  but 
began  to  act  very  cautiously  in  his  dealings  with  him, 
appeased  the  Moors,  who  complained  every  d^y  of  the  rob- 
beries practised  upon  tliem  by  Utemutaraja,  who  was  con- 
stantly leading  his  men  in  little  bands  about  the  count:^.; 
robbing  the  people  who  had  returned  to  “settle  in  the  |ity  in 
consequence  oMhe  safeguard  held  ’ out  to  thehi  by  Afonso 
Dalhoquerque,  And  not  content  with  this,  Utemutaraja 
had  even  given  orders  for  seizing  all  tho  slaves  of  the  King 
and  his  liandarins,  and  of  the  Merchants,  and  began  to 
take  possession  for  himself  of  certain  estates  in  tho  interior 
country,  which  liad  boon  deserted  by  the  Governors  of 
Malaca  when  they  had  fled  with  the  King,  without  anyone 
being  able  to  compel  him  to  relinquish'  any  of  the  things 
which  ho  had  seized. 

And  because  the  merchants  and  people  of  the  city  came 
again  to  pour  out  their  complaints  against  Utemutaraja  to 
Afonso  Dalboquerque,  and  because  also  ho  liad  intercepted^ 
all  the  cargoes  of  rice  that  had  arrived,  and  would  not  suffer 
a single  merchant  to  purchase  any  of  them,  in  order  to 
have  them  all  in  his  own  hands,  so  that  on  this  account 
there  was  a great  scarcity  of  provisions,  Afonso  Dalbo- 
querque sent  word. to  Utemutaraja,  through  Puy  de  Araujo, 
temporising  with  him,  that  certain  merchants  were  com- 
plaining of  the  bad  governnlent  of  tho  land ; but  must 


AFONSO  DALBOQUERQUE. 


146 


surely  be  without  any  reason,  for  they  were  a difficult  class 
to  be  made  happy,  yet  he  begged  earnestly  that  he  would 
give  orders  for  an  inquiry  to  be  made  into  the  matter.  But 
Utemutaraja  took  so  little  heed  of  this  hint  to  mend  his 
ways,  that  Afonso  Dalboquerque  again  sent  word  to  say 
that  on  an  occasion  when  a certain  Nalrfi,^  who  had  turned 
Christian — a man  in  the  employment  of  the  Meinnho* — was 
walking  in  the  district  of  Dupe,  ho  had  ordered  his  arrest ; 
and  when  the  Meinnho  with  very  gentle  words  desired 
him  to  look  well  to  what  he  was  doing,  for  that  man  was  a 
Christian  and  not  subject  to  his  jurisdiction, — but  if  he  had 
^done  anything  wrong  it  ought  to  bo  reported  to  Afonso 
Dalboquerque,  who  would  order  him  to  be  severely  beaten, — 
he  (Dtemutaraja)  had  given  no  reply,  neither  had  ho 
given  up  the  Naire^  but  from  that  time  forward  he  began 
to  c<t!istruct  in  Dupe  strong  stockades  surrounded  with 
ditches. 

Ruy  da  Araujo,  who  observed  these  evident  signs  of 
effrontery  on  the  part  of  Utemutaraja,  made  his  way  to 
Afonso  Dalboquerque,  and  related  to  him  all  these  things 
that  had  taken  place,  little  thinking  that  he  was  well  aware 
of  them  all,  and  told  him  that  unless  that  Javanese  (Ute- 
mutaraja)  wore  once  and  for  ever  put  to  silence,  he  felt  sure 
that  as^  soon  as  the  Portuguese  sailed  away  for  India  he 
would  be  the  cause  of  a great  deal  of  Iroublo  to  the  fortress, 
and  to  the  men  who  were  left  behind  in  it ; and  this  very 
same  opinion  \^as  given  to  Afonso  Dalboquerque  by  the 
mei'chants,  who  begged  him  very  oaruestly  not  to  depart 
from  Malaca  without  first  of  all  casting  Utemutaraja  out  of 
the  country,  for  he  was  a traitor,  and  an  evil  man,  who  had 
always  been  an  opponent  of  the  late  king,  and  had  oven 
endeavoured  several  times  to  rise  up  in  open  rebellion 

* See  vol.  i,  p,  4. 

* Meipufw^  an  orticcr  whose  duty  it  is  to  appreacud  oriininals  and 
Tpalefactors. 


VOL,  III. 


146 


COMMENTARIES  OF 


against  him ; and  they  declared  that  they  dared  not  stay  in 
the  land  if  Utemutaraja  remained  therein ; and  they  gave 
very  good  reasons  for  all  this,  alleging  that  Utemutaraja 
was  not  only  an  old  man,  and  of  very  ancient  family,  and 
one  to  whom  much  faith  was  attached  in  that  country,  but 
also  he  had  many  sons  and  grandsons,  and  was  very  rich, 
and  had  many  retainers.  And  beyond  all  these  arguments 
which  the  merchapts  laid  before  Afonso  Dalboquerque,  he 
himself  had  certain  information  that  the  principal  reason 
why  this  Javanese  practised  those  doings  was  becauso  he 
could  not  boar  that  the  Quilins  and  Chitims,  who  were 
Hindoos,  should  be  out  of  his  jurisdictiap,  or  have  a 
governor  and  a system  of  judicature  set  apart  for  them- 
selves, for  it  was  Ninachatu  who  ruled  thorn,  and  framed  his 
government  in  accordance  with  their  native  Hindoo  manners 
and  customs.  And  another  strong  motive  which  influenced 
this  matter  was  that  Afonso  Dalboquerque  greatly  favoured 
the  Hindoo  merchants,  because  they  were  men  much  em- 
ployed in  trading,  and  richer,  and  possessed  of  greater 
estates  than  the  Moors ; and  in  their  hands  lay  all  the  com- 
merce and  business  of  Malaca,  and  they,  too,  were  under 
the  obligation  of  causing  six  hundred  families  of  the  richest 
inhabitants  of  Choramandel  to  come  and  settle  in  Malaca ; 
and  this  favour  which  Afonso  Dalboquerque  showed  to  the 
Hindoos,  and  the  great  trouble  ho  was  at  to  root  out  the 
Moors  from  Malaca,  was  the  cause  of  Utemutaraja’s  enter- 
ing into  a confederation  with  King  Alaoadip  to  rise  up  in 
revolt  against  our  people. 


AFONSO  DALBOQUEKQIIK. 


147 


CHAPTER  XXXIV. 

How  the  grt)at  Afonso  Dalbo<|uerque,  on  accouiq.  of  thu  cori’ohoration 
which  he  received  concerning  the  treason  which  Uteruuliiraja  vjou 
planning  against  liira,  determined  U)  seize  liim,  ami  his  sou,  aiid  his 
son-in-law ; and  the  rest  that  took  place,  and  what  jwwscd  with  the 
wife  of  Utemutaraja. 

The  great  Afonso  Dalboquerquo,  being  tlms  awaro  of  the 
conspiracy  in  which  Utemutaraja  was  engaged  together  with 
the  King  Alaoadim,  intending  to  rise  up  in  revolt  against 
him,  and  having  information  that  ho  had  bought  up  all  the 
rice  in  the  markets,  which  formed  the  staple  article  of  food 
for  the  inhabitants  of  the  city,  and  fearing  that  this  business 
would  entail  groat  trouble  upon  him  if  ho  boro  with  Utemu- 
taraja any  longer,  determined  to  seize  him  and  his  son,  son- 
in-law,  and  grandson,^  and  on  several  occasions  caused 
them  to  bo  summoned,  that  ho  might  take  counsel  with 
them  concerning  the  government  of  tho  land,  but  they 
always  made  excuses  for  absenting  themselves,  and  were 
unwilling  to  come  at  his  summons,  whereat  xVfonso  Dalbo- 
querquo began  to  be  more  displeased  than  ever  with  them  ; 
nevertheless,  he  continued  to  dissemble  his  real  feelings 
towards  them. 

But  when  tho  time  came  for  Afonso  I'alboquorquo  to  sot 
sail  for  India,  and  ho  saw  ho  could  not  bring  this  affair  to 
a conclusion  except  by  some  open  acts  of  force,  veiling  his 
real  intentions  said  to  Cojeabrahem,^  a Moor,  by  nation 
a Persian,  who  was  a great  friend  of  Utemutaraja,  who  was 
constantly  requesting  him  to  give  him  the  official  position 

* “ Tinha  ellc  hum  filho  valentc  caualleiro,  e tiuha  hum  sc'u  genro, 
caaado  com  huinarfilhil^  de  quo  tinha  hum  ncto  viiento  camillciro,  todos 
bomenB  muy  poderosos  e riqos."  — Corrcrt,  p.  258. 

* Cog^Abraham,  i.e.,  Master  Abralwim ; for  the  first  part  of  tho  word, 
wliich  is  a titular  designation,  sec  vol.  i,  p.  2^7. 


148 


COMMENTARIES  OF 


of  Quitoal,'^  that  he  had  determined  not  to  confer  the  offices 
of  the  city  upon  any  one  without  the  counsel  and  advice  of 
the  principal  inhabitants  of  it,  and  therefore  they  must  all 
be  convened,  and  jf  they  were  agreed  then  he  would  give 
him  tho  office  in  their  presence. 

Cojeabrahem,  seeing  by  this  a means  for  the  accomplish- 
ment of  his  aspirations,  so  managed  that  he  brought  them 
together  and  conv^eyed  them  to  the  fortress  where  Afonso 
Dalboquorque  was  with  all  the  captains ; and  when  they  had 
gone  in,  without  any  further  parley  with  them,  Afonso  Dal- 
boquerque  ordered  that  their  arms  should  be  taken  away 
from  them,  and  then  gave  orders  to  Ruy  de  4raujo  to  read 
to  them  before  the  whole  assembly  certain  articles  which 
he  had  against  Uterautaraja  and  his  son,  son-in-law,  and 
grandson,  concerning  many  things  which  they  had  done 
against  the  service  of  the  King  D.  Manuel,  their  lord,  and 
among  others  tho  letter  which  Utemutaraja  had  written  to 
King  Alaoadira. 

Utemutaraja  confessed  to  certain  of  the  articles,  but 
denied  others,  and  as  for  the  letter,  ho  said  it  was  truo 
that  he  had  written  it,  but  it  was  not  his  intention  to  revolt 
against  Afonso  Dalboquerque,  but  rather  to  get  the  king 
into  his  own  hands,  so  as  to  deliver  him  up  to  the  Portu- 
guese ; and  as  for  tho  rico  which  they  alleged  he  had^bought 
up  and  kept  in  hand,  he  had  indeed  bought  it  to  Inake 
profit  by  the  transaction,  for  this  was  the  business  by  which 
ho  made  his  living,  and  he  had  not  done  t^s  for  any  other 
or  for  any  bad  purpose ; but  these  were  matters  which  the 
Hindoos  had  trumped  up  against  him  out  of  the  ill  will 
they  bore  him  because  he  would  not  tkke  part  in  their 
peculations. 

» Correa  gives  the  sjgniticatipn  of  this  native  tille  bjr  the  paraphrase : 
— “ Que  andaua  em  requerimento  com  o Gouemador  que  o fizesse  gozil 
€ gmrda  do  mar";  i,e.y  governor  pf  the  port,  and  warden  of  the  sea, 

or.n 


;!IF0NS0  DAJL130QUEKQn£. 


1M> 

WHen  tbia  o»atnination  was  over,  Afonso  Dalboquerquo 
gave  orders  to  put  all  four  of  the  prisoners  into  a collar  of  tho 
keep,  and  to  maintain  good  watcli  over  thorn,  and  to  throw 
down  tho  stockades  and  till  in  the  rlitchcs  vv^luch  Utomataraja 
had  constructed  in  his  district ; and  to  Pero  L’alpoem,  who 
held  the  office  of  Ouvidor^  order  was  given  forthwith  to 
take  judicial  notice  of  their  deeds,  and  to  act  iu  strict  letter 
of  law  against  them.  As  soon  as  the  merchants  and  principal 
inhabitants  received  the  news  that  Afonso  Dalboquorque  had 
captured  Utemutaraja  and  his  sons,  they  came  and  asked 
him  to  make  just  restitution  of  tho  great  quantity  of  pro- 
perty of  which  that  prince  had  robbed  them.  Therefore  ho 
gave  instructions  to  the  Ouvidor  to  cause  restoration  to  be 
made  to  them  of  everything  that  should  prove  to  have  boon 
obtained  by  robbery ; and  beside  many  other  things  which 
were  thus  caused  to  be  restored  to  these  merchants  and  to 
the  people  of  the  city,  there  wore  five  hundred  slaves  whom 
Utemutaraja  had  seized  by  force.  And  when  all  the  forms 
of  the  judicial  process  had  been  executed,  and  when  every- 
thing was  at  an  end,  waiting  for  tho  passing  of  the  sentence, 
•Afonso  Ualboquerque  gave  orders  for  the  summoning  of  all 
the  captains,  and  in  their  presence  told  tho  Ouvidor  to  read 
the  indictment  pf  the  crimes  of  the  prisoners  ; and  having 
heard  them,  they  adjudged  tho  prisoTiers  to  suffer  capital 
punishment-  by  decollation. 

As  soon  as  the  sentence  had  been  pronounced,  Afonso 
Dalboquerquo  gave  orders  that  there  should  bo  set  up  a lofty 
scaffolding  in  tho  middle  of  the  square,  that  the  execution 
might  be  witnessed  by  all  the  populace.  Now  when  the  wife 
of  Utemutaraja  kutw  that  her  husband  and  eiiildren  were  con- 
demned to  death,  sho  sent  to  Afonso  Dalbequerquo  a 
Javanese  named  Patequitir,  to  beg  he  would  have  pity  on 

* Chief  magistrate. 

* JuJ^dram  (pic  morressem  morte  mUiirul ; a curiinis  Fortuguefie  pUrafiO. 
probably  to  bo  accounted  for  on  oiq>lieniistiy  principles. 


150 


COMMENTARIES  OP 


her  and  pardon  her  husband  and  her  children,  and  she 
would  take  them  away  with  her  and  go  and  live  in  her  own 
country  (for  she  was  a native  of  Java),  for  she  was  never 
happy  at  their  living  in  Malaca,  and  on  this  condition  she 
would  give,  towards  defraying  the  expenses  of  the  works  at  the 
fortress,  seven  Baharos  of  gold,  each  one  of  which  contains 
four  quintals}  Afonso  Dalboquerque  replied  that  the  custom 
of  the  Portuguese  \pas  not  to  sell  justice  for  gold,  that  for  his 
part  he  was  very  sorry  to  find  them  guilty  and  to  have 
to  give  orders  for  justice  to  be  meted  out  to  them, 
but  that  he  would  allow  that  their  bodies  after  death 
should  be  delivered  over  to  them  that  they  might  bury  them 
according  to  their  own  rites.  When  the  scaffold  was  ready 
he  ordered  the  Ouvidor  to  go  and  execute  justice  upon  the 
prisoners,  taking  with  him  in  his  train  all  the  guards,  and 
a large  body  of  other  men  armed,  because  these  criminals 
were  men  of  considerable  importance ; and  when  they  wore  on 
the  scaffold  and  the  executioner  desired  to  execute  the  sons 
first,  Utemutaraja  said  to  him  that  he  should  begin  upon 
him,  for  he  was  an  old  man,  and  could  not  bear  to  see  them 
come  to  such  a fearful  end.  The  bodies  remained  where 
they  were  from  the  morning  until  the  evening,  in  sight  of 
all  the  people  of  the  city,  who  could  not  bring  themselves  to 
believe  that  these  men  had  been  executed. 

This  spectacle  of  the  punishment  of  these  Moors  Was  a 
special  permission  of  Divine  Providence,  for  in  this  very 

^ Correa’s  account  of  this  proffered  gift  involves  a onrious  typogruphi- 
eal  error  in  his  text.  ITie  passage  is  as  follows  E por  ysso  dariao 
aeto  bdres  d’ouro  e mco,  que  erao  triuta  quintaes,  por  cada  hiuii  dez,” 
p.  260.  “And  they  would  give  seven  and  a half  bdres  of  gold,  which 
was  thirty  tjuintals^  for  each  one  ten';  a manifest  error  for  four. 

Tlie  Quintal  is  equivalent  to  four  Arrohnn.,  or  58.7428  kilo,  French. 
Vieynv’s  description  of  the  Bahar  is  Somewhat  confused.  He  gives  three 
values,  38G  lbs.  avoiref.,  625  Ibe.  and  6260  lbs.  for  different  Eastern 
localities.  Bluteau  quotes  a i)as8age  fmin  Damiao  de  (Joes,  fol.  60,  col. 

3, “ Que  faz  cada  Bahir  trcti  quhitaes,  tres  arrobas,  e desout®  arrate? 

do  nosso  jHiSo”, 


AFONSO  DALBOQUERQUE. 


151 


same  square,  where  Afonso  Dalboquerque  ordered  these 
men  to  be  decapitated  by  the  sword  of  the  justice  of  the 
King  of  Portugal,  two  years  ago  the  King  of  Malaca  had 
determined  to  kill  his  chief  captain,  Diogo  Lopez  de 
Sequeira,  and  all  those  who  accompanied  him  to  that  country, 
in  a banquet  which  was  given  to  them,  had  it  not  been  for  a 
woman  of  Java,  who  by  night  swam  off  to  the  ships  to  warn 
one  of  the  mariners  who  was  her  friendJ  The  wife  of  Ute« 
mutaraja,  after  having  performed  her  rites  of  sepulture  upon 
those  devilish  corpses,*  conferred  with  Patequitir  and  gave 
him  seven  or  eight  miiicae^  of  gold,  and  desired  him  to 
gather  toother  all  her  slaves,  who  were  very  many,  and  to 
take  vengeance  for  her  upon  the  QuiUna'*'  and  OldtmsJ*  who 
had  been  the  cause  of  the  death  of  her  husband  and  her 
sons. 

When  Afonso  Dalboquerque  knew  of  this,  ho  came  up 
with  some  soldiers  and  fell  upon  this  band,  and  put  them  all 
to  the  sword  in  the  very  streets  of  the  city,  killing  a great 
number  of  them.  Patequitir,  finding  himself  worsted,  and 
seeing  that  he  had  no  power  to  carry  out  what  was  desired 
of  him,  took  the  wife  of  Utemutaraja,  and  all  the  property 
he  could  carry  off,  and  struck  out  into  tlie  interior  of  tho 
country,  and  set  fire  to  a large  number  of  country  houses  of 
Ohitins  and  Quilins,  and  carried  on  this  rebellion  for  ten  or 
tweKe  days ; but  when  he  reflected  that  this  enterprise  of 
his  could  not  possibly  come  to  a good  end,  ho  sent  to 
Afonso  Dalboquerque  to  give  him  a safeguard,  and  this  was 
granted  according  to  his  request,  but  he  would  not  return  to 
live  in  Malaca. 

This  Utemutaraja  was  by  birth  a Javanese  Hindoo,  and 
it  was  many  years  since  ho  had  become  a Moor.  He  was 
about  eighty  or  ninety  years  of  age,  of  the  lower  class ; ho 
was  poor  when  he  came  to  Malaca,  and*  ho  had  lived  about 

^ Se(*,vol.  ii,  pp.  73,  74.  ' AfimlUs  corpos  de  Saiands, 

' » See  p.  142.  ' See  p.  12H.  ''  See  vol.  ii,  p.  130  n. 


152 


COMMENTAiaES  OF 


fifty  years  there:  he  prospered  well  with  his  raerobant 
trade,  and  became  exceedingly  rich  ; ho  was  very  proud,  ex- 
cessively tyrannical,  restless,  rebellious,  and  so  was  ho 
always  in  the  time  cf  King  Mahamet;  and  ho  had  so  much 
power  and  so  much  authority  in  Malaca,  that  had  he  not 
been  gut  rid  of  ho  would  certainly  have  caused  very  great 
trouble  to  us.  For  Afonso  Dalboquerque  very  often  used 
to  say  (wliou  he  observed  how  quiet  the  country  reiuainod 
after  the  death  of  Utemutaraja),  that  if  he  had  carried  out  a 
similar  policy  in  Ormuz,  iu  regard  to  Cogeatar,^  that  one 
also  would  never  have  raised  up  rebellion  against  him,  nor 
practised  so  many  impostures  upon  him. 

This  son  of  his,  who  was  put  to  death  with  him,  was  the 
one  who  stood  ready  with  the  dagger  in  his  hand  to  murder 
Diogo  Lopez  do  Sequeira ; and  ho  it  was,  too,,  whom  the 
King  of  Malaca  had  appointed  Captain,  after  the  fall  of 
Diogo  Lopez,  to  seize  the  ships  of  the  Portuguese,  with  a 
large  body  c f his  own  aUd  his  fathers  retainers ; but  Our 
Lord  would  not  that  he  should  accomplish  this  crime,  but, 
on  the  other  hand,  willed  that  he  should  pay  the  penalty 
which  such  an  undertaking  merited. 


CHAPTER  XXXV. 

flow  Duarte  Fernan^lcz,  and  the  Chinese,  whom  he  carried  in  his  com- 
jtany,  reached  the  city  of  Udid,  where  the  King  of  SiSo  lived,  and 
gave  him  the  message  which  he  carried  from  the^reat  Afonso  Dal- 
boquerque ; and  of  the  ambassador  whom  the  King  of  SiSo  sent  to 
him. 

When  Duarte  Fernandez  had  sot  sail  from  Malaca  in 
company  with  the  two  Chinese  captains,  bearing  tho 
message  of  the  gr^eat  Afonso  Dalboquerque  to  the  King 
of  Sido,  as  has  already  been  mentioned,  in  a few  days  they 

* See  vol.  i‘  p.  108,  etc.  * ^ 


AFONSO  DAtBOgrBRQCE. 


m 


stood  off  ou  thp  other  tack  and  reached  the  mouth  of  a 
large  river  which  leads  to  the  City  of  Udia,^  in  which  the 
King  of  Siam  lived;  and  when  the  King  beard  of  the 
arrival  there  of  some  foreign  people  he  sent  thither  a 
Captain  with  two  hundred  launches,  to"  learn  what  people 
they  were  and  whence  they  came. 

As  soon  as  the  Captain  reached  the  harbour  where  the 
Chinese  had  remained,  ho  enquired  ‘of  Duarte  Fernandez 
the  purpose  of  his  journey,  and  by  whom  he  had  been  sent. 
Duarte  Fernandez  replied  that  he  was  the  messenger  of  a 
great  Captain  of  the  King  of  Portugal,  who  was  established 
at  Malaca  with  a large  fleet,  and  that  he  had  been  sent 
thither  by  the  orders  of  that  Captain  to  visit  the  King  of 
Siao  and  carry  a letter  to  him.  On  receiving  this  intelli- 
geuco  the  Siamese  Captain  sent  to  the  King  an  account  of 
-the  people,  who  they  were,  and  with  what  object  they  had 
come,  and  asking  that  instructions  should  bo  sent  how  he 
desired  him  to  proceed  in  this  matter. 

The  King,  having  already  had  some  information  of  the 
arrival  of  Afonso  Dalboquerque  at  Malaca,  was  very  much 
gratified  to  know  that  this  messenger  came  from  him,  and 
ordered  the  Captain  to  bring  the  messenger  to  him  im- 
mediately. When  the  King’s  reply  was  received  the  Captain 
embarked  in  the  launches  with  Duarte  Fernandez  and  the 
Chinese  Captains,  and  they  all  proceeded  up  the  river^  as  far 
as  the  City,  and  when  the  party  disembarked  the  Captain 
with  all  his  men  escorted  Duarte  Fernandez  to  the  Palace, 
where  the  King  was  waiting  for  them  in  a largo  hall,  all 
hung  round  with  brocades  and  upholstered  with  very  rich 

> Udia,  called  by  llriizen  de  la  Martiaiere  Juthia  or  Judia^  the  capital 
city  of  the  kingdom  of  Siam,  con-upted  from  the  native  name  SUjv-thi-yd, 
Pedro  Barretto  de  Resende,  in  MSf,  Sloan,  197,  fol.  380,  shows  on  Ber- 
thelot’s  map  of.vl635,  the  “Cidade  de  India,  thetropolli  do  Rcino  de 
Siam”.  Keith  Johnston,  in  his  Royal  Atlas,  places  Yuthia  or  Ayuthia, 
a little  jio  the  north  of  Bangkok,  14  di*g.  24  iniu.  N.,  100  deg.  27  min.  E. 
* * The  river  Meuuin,  see  p.  71  n. 


154 


COHMENTABIER  OF 


cushioiiR,  the  King  himself  being  seated  o^n  a lofty  chair^ 
habited  in  the  Chinese  fashion^  and  close  to  him^  on  the 
right  and  left,  all  his  wives  and  daughters,  seated,  clad  in 
brocades  and  silken  clothes,  with  a great  display  of  golden 
ornaments  and  jewellery,  and  lower  down  on  each  side 
many  other  women  of  noble  birth,  dressed  after  the  same 
manner,  so  that  it  was  a very  grand  spectacle.  The  women 
of  this  country  arc  somewhat  short  of  stature,  but  yet  they 
are  very  handsome.  And  there  were  also  present  there  all 
the  principal  lords  of  the  country,  very  richly  attired. 

After  Duarte  Fernandez  had  entered  the  hall  he  made  his 
obeisance  to  the  King  after  the  Hindoo  manner,  and  went 
up  to  him  and  gave  him  Afonso  Dalboquerque^s  letter  and 
the  sword,  which  the  King  received  with  many  words  of 
acknowledgment,  asking  him  about  the  doings  at  Malaca, 
and  the  King  of  Portugal,  and  the  state  and  power  which  he 
possessed.  Duarte  Fernandez,  being  a man  of  considerable 
ability,  gave  a very  good  account  of  everything  in  his  replies 
to  the  King’s  enquiries.  And  when  this  interview  was  over 
the  Captain  was  commanded  to  take  him  to  his  own  house 
and  to  entertain  the  Chinese  Captains  in  a very  good  manner, 
and  on  the  following  day  the  King  ordered  that  all  the  City 
should  be  shown  to  him  in  order  to  do  him  honour,  and  also 
that  he  should  see  a white  Elephant  which  he  had,  at  which 
the  Chinese  became  very  greatly  struck  with  amazein^nt ; 
and  indeed  had  it  been  a thing  which  could  be  purchased, 
they  would  have  given  a large  sum  of  money^for  it  in  order 
to  carry  it  to  the  King  of  China. 

After  some  days  had  elapsed  the  King  granted  a farewell 
audience  to  Duarte  Fernandez,  sending  in  company  with 
him  an  Ambassador  to  Afonso  Dalboquerque,  with  a letter 
to  the  King  D.  Manuel,  and  a"  ring  set  with  a ruby,  and  a 
crown  and  sword  ot  gold,  and  they  set  out  frcfm  the  city  of 
Udi&  and  in  seven  days  got  as  far  as  the  other  side  pf  the 
Coast  of  Samatra  and  reached  Taranque,  which  is  a cit/ 


AFONSO  OALBOQUEUQUE. 


155 


belonging  to  tbo  King  of  Sifto,  and  from  that  point  they 
kept  along  by  his  towns  as  far  as  tho  shoals  of  Capacia, 
and  on  their  arrival  at  Malaca  they  found  the  walls  of  tho 
fortress  already  with  a great  part  of  the  battlements  and 
towers  complete,  and  much  artillery  set  up  in  them,  and  all 
the  city  in  obedience  to  Afonso  Dalboquerque. 

The  Chinese  Captains,  who  had  all  along  fancied  that  ho 
would  be  ruined  in  that  enterprise  of  hjs  against  Malaca, 
when  they  beheld  the  fortress  finished  and  the  peaceable 
state  of  the  city  were  very  much  astonished,  and  very  much 
ashamed  of  the  way  in  which  they  had  behaved  towards  him 
before  their  voyage.  When  Afonso  Dalboquerque  learned 
that  an  Ambassador  of  the  King  of  Si^o  had  come  in 
company  with  Duarte  Fernandez,  he  gave  orders  that  he 
should  be  received  by  all  the  Captains,  and  ho  treated  him 
with  great  honour  and  entertained  him.  The  Ambassador 
delivered  to  him  a letter  which  he  had  brought,  and  another 
for  the  King  D.  Manuel,  with  the  present.  The  letter  for 
Afonso  Dalboquerque  was  the  reply  to  that  which  had  been 
sent  to  tho  King  by  Duarte  Fernandez,  and  in  it  the  King 
said  that  he  was  much  pleased  with  the  messenger  and  with 
the  declaration  of  friendship,  and  ottered  him  his  kingdom 
and  person  for,  tho  service  of  the  King  of  Portugal,  and 
supplier  and  men  and  merchandize  for  his  country,  as  much 
as  required,  and  that  for  a long  time  he  had  desired  to 
be  on  friendly  terms  with  him  on  account  of  the  great 
things  which  he  had  heard  reported  of  the  Portuguese  done 
against  the  Moors,  and  that  he  hoped  ho  would  take 
vengeance  for  him  upon  that  tyrant  the  King  of  Malaca, 
for  as  yet  he  did  ii6t  know  that  tho  city  was  taken. 


156 


COMMENTARIES  OF 


CHAPTER  XXXVI. 

How  the  great  Afonso  Dalbo<|uerque  dispatched  tho  amb.'iasador  of  the 
King  of  Si.lo,  and  in  (?ouipaMy  with  him  sent  Antonio  do  Miraucia 
do  Acevedo  with  iristnictions  how  to  act,  and  of  the  preaent  which 
was  sent  tlirough  him. 

As  soon  as  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerquo  had  con- 
cluded his  interviews  with  the  Ambassador  of  the  King  of 
Siflo,  he  determined — being  just  on  tho  point  of  setting 
sail  for  India — to  dispatch  liim  back  again,  and  to  send  in 
company  with  him  Antonio  de  Miranda  do  Azevedo,  as 
Ambassador  to  the  King,  and  ordered  him  to  make  ready 
to  sail  in  the  junk  of  the  Chinese  who  were  waiting  there 
for  him ; and  tliis  was  the  instruction  given  to  him  as  to 
what  he  was  to  say  : — 

You  shall  declare  to  the  King  of  Siilo  how  tho  King  of 
Portugal,  tny  lord,  sent  mo  to  this  port  of  Malaca  to  take 
notice  of  the  treason  which  the  king  and  hia  governors  did 
to  a certain  one  of  his  chief  captains  and  to  his  men,  who 
had  been  sent  to  treat  as  to  terms  of  friendship,  and  that 
he  had  killed  them  in  face  of  a safeguard  which  had  been 
granted  to  them,  and  thrown  into  captivity  in  that  country 
a great  part  of  the  men. 

'^You  shall  declare  to  him  that,  after  I had  arrived  at 
this  port,  I had  sent  many  times  to  beg  of  tho  king  tTgivo 
an  account  of  his  proceedings,  and  order  the  release  of  the 
l^rtuguese  whom  he  had  thrown  into  captivity,  and  make 
good  tho  property  which  he  had  taken ; but  he,  with  his 
unmeasured  pride,  never  gave  answer  to  this  proposal,  nor 
de^red  to  be  on  friendly  terms,  nor  make  a treaty  of  peace 
with  mo,  but  shewed  favour  to  the  Moors  of  India  (who  had 
their  ships  there)  jn  opposition  to  the  service  of  the  King 
of  Portugal, 

You  shall  declare  that  when  I beheld  his  determination  ^ 
to  be  false  1 attacked  ,his  city  and  entercd  into  it  by  force 


ilPONSO  DALBOQUERQUE. 


157 


of  arms,  and  overcame  tlie  king  (who  escaped  with  a wound 
only)  and  hia  people  and  his  elephants ; but,  in  order  that  I 
should  not  destroy  the  city,  I ro-em  barked,  and  so  re- 
mained for  the  space  of  fifteen  days  in  expectation  of  his 
repentance ; and  the  king,  having  had  experience  of  tho 
dashing  spirit  of  the  Portuguese  cavaliers,  had  nevertheless 
not  abandoned  the  intention  of  risking  all  at  any  price  upon 
the  hazard  of  war,  rather  than  wishing  to  have  an  agree- 
ment of  peace  and  friendship  arranged  between  myself  and 
him. 

You  shall  declare  to  him  that,  in  order  to  repress  this 
Contumacy  which  he  shewed,  I again  attacked  the  city  and 
overthrew  it,  killing  many  people  and  oven  some  of  his 
captains  j and  I took  his  elephants  and  I burnt  his  palaces, 
but  I forgave  his  people  and  his  merchants,  so  that  the  city 
might  not  bo  destroyed  nor  the  trade  of  the  country ; and 
that  I give  the  King  of  Si^o  hereby  this  notice  of  it, 
because  I know  for  certain  that  he  will  be  well  pleased  at 
hearing  of  the  overthrow  of  this  king,  for  ho  has  always 
been  at  war  with  him. 

You  shall  declare  unto  him  that  the  King  of  Portugal, 
my  lord,  will  be  greatly  pleased  if  the  ships  and  people  of 
Sifto  trade  with  Malaca,  and  that  this  was  the  principal 
reason  ,why  I was  glad  when  it  was  taken  ; and,  if  he 
shouM  have  any  need  of  the  fleets  or  armies  of  Sifio  for  the 
preservation  of  his  estate,  I,  as  his  captain  general,  will 
make  use  of  them  in  everything  that  ho  orders  mo  to  do.’^ 

And  with  these  instructions  Afonso  Dalboquerque  gave 
him  a present  for  the  king,  to  bo  given  to  him  in  the  name 
of  the  King  of  Poi  tugal,  consisting  of  some  breast-piec^  of 
crimson  velvet;  a long  corselet  with  complete  suit  of  arms ; 
a helmet  with  the  chin-piece  very  richly  garnished;  a 
buckler  of  bdff,'  with  its  cordings  very  richly  made  and  set 

I A<}mrga  dania.  The  Anta,  according  to  Vieyra,  is  an  animal  found 
in  the  East  Indies,  like  a little  cow,  without  horns.  The  hide  is  much 
valued  to  make  buff  small-clothes. 


158 


C01fM£NTARl£S  OF 


in  a brocaded  guige  ; ^ throe  cloths  of  arms  made  of  velvet 
and  satins  of  various  colours,  stamped  in  patterns  and 
trimmed  with  gold  tassels.  These  had  belonged  to  the 
King  of  Maloca,  and  had  adorned  the  wooden  house  wherein 
the  King  of  Ptlo,  his  son-in-law,  was  to  go  in  procession 
through  the  streets  of  the  city  (as  I have  related  already^) ; 
and  a basin  for  washing  the  hands,  with  bastions  and  two 
double-handed  va§es*  of  the  same  pattern  ; and  a small 
kettle  of  fine  workmanship ; and  two  cups  with  bastions, 
all  of  silver ; and  a cross-bow,  with  its  furniture ; ^ and 
four  branches  of  coral,  very  thick  and  of  fine  quality, 
because  of  its  great  value  in  that  country ; ;^nd  a piece  of 
scarlet;  and  he  made  a present  of  some  articles  to  the 
King  of  Sifto^B  ambassador,  whereat  he  was  much  pleased. 

Antonio  de  Miranda,  as  soon  as  ho  received  his  letters  of 
credence  for  the  King,  embarked  on  board  the  Chinese  junk, 
and  proceeding  on  the  voyage  in  a few  days  reached  the  city 
of  Taranque,  which  belongs  to  the  King  of  Sifto,  and  there 
ho  parted  from  the  Chinese  and  made  his  way  through  the 
country  with  horses  and  draught  oxen,  straight  to  the  city 
of  Siao,  where  ho  was  very  graciously  received  by  the  King 
who  was  reigning  there. 

This  kingdom  of  Siao  is  very  narrow  on^^that  side  where 
the  Chinese  make  their  navigation.  It  possesses  soijie  har- 
bours and  villages,  and  from  thence  it  is  a ten  days'  jotfrney 
to  the  coast  of  Tana(;arij,®  and  Taranque,  and  Saviao,  and 
on  the  other  side  of  the  sea  of  Samatra  he  has  also  ra^any 
harbours  and  villages,  and  he  is  lord  of  a large  population, 
These  are  Hindoos,  and  in  the  country  are  many  Moorish 
merchants  from  numerous  parts  of  the  world.  The  Chinese 
keep  up  in  this  country  their  establishments,  for  they  repose 

i Futida^  a sling,  atraf),  or  ynigCj  by  which  the  shield  i ? slung  over  the 
shoulder.  * See  p.  107.  » See  vol.  ii,  p.  205. 

« Albarradas,  . • Almm- 

* Tenasserim,  12  deg.  2 min.  N.,  98  deg.  65  rain.  E. 


AFONSO  DALBOQUERQUE. 


159 


great  confidence  in  the  people.  The  King  of  this  land  was 
always  at  war  with  the  King  of  Malaoa,  and  therefore  he 
was  not  sorry  to  see  him  overcome. 

There  are  many  things  which  I could  have  written  about 
this  kingdom  of  Sillo,  but  my  purpose  is  not  to  write  any 
more  about  the  countries  than  that  which  is  necessary  for 
the  understanding  of  this  history. 


CHAPTER  XXXVIL 

How  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerquc  dispatched  the  ambaasadora  of  the 
Kings  of  CaAipar  and  Java,  and  ordered  the  exploration  of  the 
Island  of  Maluco. 

The  King  of  Campar  having  received  intelligence  of  the 
discomfiture  of  Malaca,  and  of  the  state  in  which  the  affairs 
of  that  kingdom  were^  and  fearing  that  because  he  was  his 
son-in-law  the  fury  of  the  Portuguese  would  be  brought 
to  bear  also  against  his  own  country,  embarked  in  ton 
launches,  and  came  down  to  the  river  Muar,  which  is  in  tlm 
kingdom  of  Malaca,  a distance  of  eight  leagues  from  the 
city,  opposite  to  the  kingdom  of  PAo,  and  when  ho  had 
arnved  this  river  he  sent  a messenger  to  Afonso  Dal- 
boquerque  with^a  present  of  eight  packages^  of  lenhonoe?  of 
very^fine  quality,  and  two  of  a mass  which  is  made  of  the 
blood  of  the  dragon,®  which  serves  as  a varnish  for  painted 

* Fardos,  bundles  or  bales.  The  fardo  in  India  is  a definite  amount 
of  for:y‘two  pounds  weight  Portuguese. 

* Lenhonoe ; perhaps  the  hn-hae^  considered  by  the  Kev.  Dr.  Mason  of 
Burmah  to  be  the  Acorus  Calamus,  the  root  of  which  is  very  fragrant. 
See  J.  F.  Watson’s  Indcj^  to  the.  Native  and  Scientific  Names  of  Indian  find 
other  Eastern  Economic  Plants,  p.  342,  fol  London.  1868,  Indian 
Museum.  Cf.  lenholoes,  chapter  xUsi. 

* Dragrso,  a typographical  error  for  dragao.  The  sangm  do  dragdo  w 
the  resiu  of  a t?ree  known  to  botanists  as  Calamus  Draco.  Bluteau  writes 
of  the  Sangue  de  Drago He  huma  especie  de  goma,  que  por  mcis^ 
destilla  em  licor,  e logo  oin  se  levautaiido  o sol,  se  endurece,  e se  cougela 


160 


COMMENTARIES  OF 


articles,  and  sent  word  to  say  to  Afonso  Dalboqnerque  that 
this  was  a specimen  of  the  fruit  that  wad  feathered  in  his 
country,  and  that  ho  very  greatly  desired  his  friendship,  and 
to  become  a vassal  and  a servant  of  the  King  of  Portugal, 
and  that  ho  was  not  culpable  in  any  way  for  the  doings  of 
his  fathor-in-law. 

Afonso  Dalboquerque  sent  to  thank  him  sincerely  for  the 
present,  and  for  the  desire  to  serve  tho  King  of  Portugal,  his 
Lord,  which  he.  had  shown,  and  he  sent  him  also  certain 
things  in*return  for  his  present,  and  offered  him  men  and  a 
fleet  whenever  ho  might  need  them ; and  when  this  mes- 
senger from  the  King  of  Campar  had  set  forth  on  his  return 
journey,  Afonso  Dalboquerque  dispatched  another,  who  many 
days  ago  had  arrived  there  from  the  King  of  Java,  bringing 
with  him  for  a present  a dozen  lances  of  very  great  length 
with  their  slings  of  wood  fastened  into  the  iron,  and  a very 
long  piece  of  cloth,  whereon  was  painted  a representation  of 
the  manner  in  which  tho  King  goes  to  battle,  with  his  car- 

em  humas  poquenas  lagrimas  friavcis,  e vermelhaa  como  sanguo.  O 
isaiiguo  de  Drago  com  estaa  qualidadca  he  o molhor  doe  tres,  que  Be  ven- 
dem  nas  boticas.  Mana  de  huma  arvorc  do  taiuaidio  de  pinheyro,  que 
dll  muyto  ramo,  e lanija  humas  folhas  da  feypSo  de  e8padas.i  OS  frstOS 
se  parecem  com  ginjas,  e fonimndo  huns  como  cacaos,  de  amarellos  se 
fazem  vermelhos,  e de  vertnelhos  azues,  C azedinhos  ao  gosto.  Disserfio 
alguna,  que,  tiradii  desto  fruto  a pelle,  apparece  a figura  de  h\i?i*  drago, 
donde  Ihe  veyo  o uoiue ; por^rn  a mais  commua  opiniao  tem  esta  circun- 
stancia  por  fabulosa. 

A outras  duos  goraas,  que  tem  alguma  8emelhaT)i;a  com  eata,  se  da  o 
norne  de  sangue  de  Drago;  huma  se  lira  de  humas  plantaa  dai!s  Tlhaa 
Canarias,  a qual  da  folhas  como  de  pereyra,  a outra  tem  folhas  como  de 

ginjeyra,  e <Hzem  que  htuna  e outra  se  cria  na  Ilha  de  S.  IjOureu<;o 

Disserao  outros  que  o sanguo  de  Dragfio  era  huhia  certa  especie  de  ver> 
melhao,  muyto  fino,  o apurado.  O que  tamhem  he  falso,  porque  o verda- 
doyro  vermelboo  he  mineral,  on  artificial,  e o saugue  do  Dragiio,  que  Be 
tisa  nos  boticas,  he  liefer  cotigelado  a modo  de  reaina,  que  se  destilLa  das 
arvores,  as  quaes... se  chamilo  Dragoens.  Sangrao  os  ruoihadorcs  da  terra 
estaa  arvores,  dandolhes  golpes  na  caeca,  onde  acode  a humidadeque  tem, 
c alii  sc  coalha,  e faz  cm  rcsina,  verifielha,  dura,  o transparente.”  - 


• AFONSO  DALBOQUBRQUIS. 


161 


riages,  horses,  and  elephants  armed  with  their  wooden 
castles,  and  a hgcire  of  the  King  therein  painted,  riding  in 
certain  wooden  erections  placed  above  the  carriages,  and 
all  this  very  beautifully  depicted ; and  ho  sent  him  also 
twenty  little  bells,  of  which  their  music  consists,  and  players 
who  could  play  upon  them  with  carved  sticks,  and  they  har- 
monised very  well  and  gave  a very  pleasant  sound;  and  be 
sent  him  two  very  large  bells,  whicfi  they  strike  in  battle, 
for  they  can  be  Iieard  a long  way  off;  and  the  King  desired 
to  offer  him  men  and  supplies,  and  all  other  things  that 
might  be  necessary  for  the  war  in  Malaca.  The  reason  of 
this  was  that  the  King  of  Java  was  very  much  opposed  to 
the  King  of  Mklaca,  on  account  of  the  frequent  tyrannies 
which  were  continually  practised  upon  his  native  subjects 
whenever  they  went  thither. 

Afonso  Dalboquorquo  dispatched  the  ambassador,  and 
with  him  he  sent  to  the  King  of  Java  one  of  the  elephants 
which  had  been  captured  in  Malaca,  for  in  that  country 
they  are  held  in  very  groat  esteem,  and  a piece  of  scarlet, 
and  another  of  velvet  crimson,  and  granted  him  free 
passage  for  himself  and  for  the  transport  of  the  elephant. 
And  just  at  this  very  juncture  there  arrived  at  Malaca 
jtangajaoas^  from  the  kingdom  of  Menamcabo,  which 
is  at  the  point  of  the  island  of  (Jamatra  on  the  other  side  of 
the  stcith.  and  brought  with  them  a sum  of  gold,  aud  they 
came  to  seek  for  cloths  of  India,  for  which  there  is  a great 
demand  in  their  country.  The  men  of  this  kingdom  are 
very  well  made,  and  of  fair  complexion ; they  walk  about 
always  well  dressed,  clad  in  their  silken  hajvs,*  and  wearing 
their  crisis  with  sheaths  adorned  with  gold  and  precious 
stones  in  their  girdles.  These  are  a people  of  good 
manners  and  truthful  characiier ; they  are  Hindoos ; they 

' Seo  p.  60  n. 

^ • Baju^,  A kind  of  garment  worn  by  the  Indian  ladies,— Ftej/ra. 

^'Camiaade  meyo  corpo.” — BhUeau. 

VOL.  III.  ^ 


]62 


COHMENTABIES  OF 


have  a great  veneration  for  a certain  golden  head-dress^ 
which,  as  they  relate,  Alexander  [the  Great]  left  there  with 
them  when  he  conquered  that  country. 

Now  that  Afonso  Dalboquerquo  had  dispatched  all  these 
messengers,  he  determined  to  send  a party  to  explore  the 
islands  of  Maluco,  and  all  the  others  of  that  archipelago,* 
for  he  had  been  informed  that  there  were  many  of  them ; 
and  he  made  ready  three  ships,  of  which  he  conferred  the 
chief  captaincy  upon  Antonio  Dabreu,  of  whom  I have 
already  written  how  he  was  wounded  in  the  junk  with 
which  he  attacked  the  bridge  at  Malaca,®  and  he  indeed 
quite  deserved  this  honour  on  account  of  his  dashing  spirit 
and  chivalrous  character.  And  of  the  other  two  ships  he 
gave  the  captaincy  to  Francisco  Serrfto  and  Simfto  Afonso ; 
and  for  pilots  ho  appointed  Luis  Botim,  and  Gonqalo  de 
Oliveira,  and  Francisco  Rodriguez,  a man  of  youthful  age, 
who  had  always  had  employment  in  India  as  a pilot,  and 
knew  very  well  how  to  set  up  a memorial  monument^  if 
it  wore  required,  and  this  indeed  was  the  object  of  Afonso 
Dalboquerque  in  sending  him  there.  And  with  them  he 
sent  two  native  pilots;  and  as  factor  JoS-o  Freiro,  servant 
of  the  Queen  D.  Leonor ; and  Diogo  Borges,  servant  of  the 
King  D.  Manuel,  to  be  the  scrivener.  And  he  prepared  a 
junk  laden  with  various  kinds  of  merchandise,  whereof  he 
gave  part  to  Ninachatu,  and  to  a Hindoo  whose  na!a2«  was 
Cogequirmani,^  whose  wife  and  children  were  settled  with 

* Carapufa  (k  ouro.*' 

* It  is  doubtful  whether  thig  refers  to  the  group  of  Moluccas  or  Spice 

Islands,  0 deg.  0 min.,  127  dog.  30  min.  £.,  as  Borneo  lays  between 
them  and  the  Malay  peninsula.  Probably  the  term  was  employed  gene- 
rally for  the  multitudinous  groups  of  small  islands  lying  on  the  equator 
between  Asia  and  Australia  in  the  Pacific.  ^ See  p.  121. 

* Padrao,  a post  or  pillar  on  which  was  engraved  an  inscription,  set 

up  in  accordance  witlf  the  custom  usually  adopted  by  the  diBOoverers  of 
new  countries.  ^ 

. * , Khoja  KirmiLnl,  the  Merchant  of  Kirman”,  or  Kermgn,  one  of 

the  provinces  of  the  Persian  E^ipire.  Here,  as^  frequently  hi  the  case. 


AFONSO  DALBOQUXRQUE. 


IG3 

him  in  Malaoa^  fmd  this  one  went  as  captain  of  the  junk. 
And  because  there  was  very  little  to  do  in  getting  the  junk 
ready  he  set  out  two  or  three  days  before  our  fleet. 

And  the  instructions  which  Afonso  Dalboquerque  gave  to 
Antonio  Dabreu  were,  on  no  account  whatever  on  that 
voyage  to  take  any  prizes,  and  to  go  on  board  of  no  vessel 
whatever,  nor  to  consent  to  any  of  his  men  going  on  shore, 
but  in  all  the  harbours  and  at  all  the  islands  at  which  ho 
might  touch  to  give  presents  and  gifts  to  the  kings  and 
lords  of  the  country,  and  for  this  purpose  he  ordered  that 
there  should  be  given  out  many  pieces  of  scarlet  and  velvets 
of  M4ca,  and  many  other  kinds  of  tnerchandiso ; and, 
further,  he  gave  orders  that  the  captain  should  not  inter- 
fere with  a single  ship  of  Malaca  or  of  the  other  parts 
(whether  they  belonged  to  the  Moors  or  to  the  Hindoos) 
which  he  might  meet  with  in  these  Clove  islands^  or  Apple 
islands*  taking  in  cargo,  but  rather  shew  them  favour  and 
give  them  as  much  assistance  as  he  possibly  could  ; and,  in 
the  same  way  that  such  ships  as  these  negotiated  for  their 
cargo,  so  also  in  like  manner  was  he  to  act  for  his  cargo, 
observing  all  the  customs  of  the  respective  countries.  But 
whatever  might  happen  not  one  of  the  captains  was  to  go 
on  land,  except  only  the  factor  and  scrivener  with  two  or 
three  to  accompany  them. 

TLe.je  ships  carried  a hundred  and  twenty  Portuguese 
and  twenty  captive  slaves  to  work  at  the  pumps  ; and  they 
went  very  well  supplied  with  provisions  and  artillery,  and 
had  on  board  plenty  of  tow  and  pitch,  and  caulkers,  in  order 
that  if  necessity  should  arise  they  might  go  and  overhaul 
their  ships  at  the  ^ape  of  a largo  island  (which  lies  at  a 
distance  of  four  days^  sail  from  the  clove  islands),  which  is 

throughout  the  Commentaries^  the  Portuguese  interpreter  appears  to  mis- 
take the  title  or  designation  of  the  individual  for  his  proper  name. 

* Em  itsaas  Ilhas  do  Cravo.  The  Molucca  Islands  are  known  even 
now 'under  the  name  of  the  Spice  Islands.  * On  das  Morans. 

M 2 


164 


COMMENTARIES  OP 


called  Amboino/  for  we  have  already  a Ij^nowledge  of  the 
rise  and  fall  of  the  tide  there.  And  when  they  were  all 
quite  prepared  they  set  out  in  the  month  of  November. 

And  as  soon  as  Antonio  de  Abreu  had  set  sail,  Afonso  Dal- 
boquerque  gave  orders  to  make  ready  a very  large  new  junk, 
pf  which  he  gave  part  to  Ninachatu  and  the  other  merchants 
of  Malaca^  and  he  ordered  that  it  should  be  laden  with  much 
merchandise  of  Cambaya,  wtich  had  been  captured  on  the 
voyage  from  India  to  Malaca,  and  that  the  vessels  should  go 
to  Pac^*  to  take  in  a cargo  of  pepper  to  be  stored  up  in  the 
fortress,  in  case  of  the  Chinese,  or  Gores  (whose  arrival 
he  was  expecting)  eoming  in  search  for  a cai^o.  And  all  the 
other  merchants  and  chitins  of  Malaca  began  to  prosecute 
their  trading  voyages,  and  to  arrange  their  commercial 
undertakings  in  such  a manner  that  in  a very  short  space  of 
time  the  brisk  trade  which  was  carried  on  in  Malaca  began 
to  bo  very  celebrated.  And  at  the  report  of  the  good  treat- 
ment which  the  groat  Afonso  Dalboquerque  had  ordered  to 
bo  shown  to  all  the  shipping  which  touched  Malaca  with 
merchandise,  they  began  to  make  their  voyages  thither  from 
all  parts,  and  every  one  of  them  found  something  in  the  way 
of  a cargo  to  carry  back  to  thoir  own  couutry. 

* Amboino;  Amboina  Island,  3 deg.  45  min.  S.,  128  deg.  15  min.  E. ; 
a little  to  the  south  of  the  island  of  Ceram.  Amboina  is  a high  belaud, 
eleven  leagues  in  extent  N.E.  aud  S.W.,  the  largest  of  those  called  the 
Clove  Islands.  The  great  bay  extends  about  seven  leagues  into  the  island, 
separating  it  nearly  into  two  parts.  Amboina  Bay  is  formed  at  the 
entrance  by  two  high  points,  that  of  Allang  on  the  west  side,  and 
Noessaniva  Point  to  the  eastward  ; they  are  stecp-to  j situated  in  lat. 
8 deg.  47  min.  S.,  long.  128  deg.  6 min.  E.,  and  bear  nearly  E.  and  W. 
of  each  other,  distant  six  miles.  About  three  cables’  lengths  from 
Noessaniva  Point,  in  a S.S.E.  direction,  there  is  a narrow  bank  of  sand, 
stretching  E.  and  W.,  having  soundings  of  fifteen  to  twenty  fathoms  on 
it,  upon  which  a sbip^'might  anchor  when  calm.  The  tides  in  the  bay 
are  very  irregular,  being  governed  chiefly  by  the  winds,  and  rise  about 
six  or  seven  feet. — Horsburgh,  India  Directory^  vol.  ii,  p.  714/#  Eighth 
Edition.  Loudon,  1864.  » Pad;  see  p.  59 


AFONSO  DALBOQUERQUE. 


165 


CHAPTER  XXXVIII. 

Of  the  Council  which  the  great  Alfonso  Dalboquerque  held  with  the 
Captains  respecting  the  order  in  which  he  should  leave  the  manage- 
ment of  affairs  at  Malaca,  and  some  ordinances  which  he  made  for 
the  governmwnt  of  the  country  before  his  departuie  for  India. 

When  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  had  concluded  his 
dispatch  of  all  the  matters  which  I have  related,  he  ordered 
that  a meeting  of  all  the  captains,  Fldalgoes,  and  servants 
of  the  King  throughout  the  fleet  should  be  convened,  and 
then  he  told  them  that  the  fortress  of  Malaca  was  now  com- 
pleted in  the  way  in  which  they  beheld  it,  with  plenty  of  artil- 
lery within  it,  capable  of  defending  itself  successfully  against 
all  the  powers  of  tlio  Kings  of  these  parts  who  could  come 
against  it : that  the  monsoon  favourable  for  a voyage  to  India 
was  now  blowing,  and  that  it  was  very  necessary  for  them  to 
set  sail,  for  the  condition  of  affairs  at  Goa  was  so  unsettled,  that 
he  could  not  tell  in  what  state  they  were ; therefore  he  de- 
sired them  earnestly  to  declare  to  him  the  policy  which  he 
ought  to  carry  out  concerning  the  government  of  Malaca, 
and  what  number  of  men,  and  how  much  artillery  he  ought 
to  leave  in  the  fortress,  and  how  many  vessels,  and  whether 
he  should  appoint  a captain  of  the  sea  or  not,  or  whether  one 
alonb  Would  be  sufficient  on  sea  and  on  land,  and  whether  or 
not  he  should  remove  certain  principal  Moors  of  the  city  of 
whom  there  was  some  suspicion. 

In  the  Council  there  arose  different  opinions,  and  at  the 
end  of  all  it  was  arranged  that  there  should  bo  a Captain 
in  the  Fortress  an  jl'  a Captain  of  the  Fleet  in  the  Sea,  and 
that  the  Captain  of  tho  Sea  should  be  under  the  orders  of 
the  Captain  of  the  Fortress  (this  was  so  aT;raDgod  to  avoid  the 
shameful  deed^  done  in  India,  which  had  then  already  taken 
^ place,  l?ut  Afonso  Dalboquerque  always  punished  them  with 
grfeat  rigour  as  long  as  he  was  Governor  of  that  country), 


166 


COMMENTARIES  OF 


and  that  he  should  take  an  oath  of  homage  to  the  Captain 
of  the  Fortress  to  obey  him  in  all  things,  and  all  the 
Captains  do  so,  as  it  were  to  the  proper  person  of  his  Lord- 
ship  ; and  if  it  should  happen  that  God  should  dispose 
of  the  Captain  of  the  Fortress,  then  the  Captain  of  the  Sea 
should  succeed  to  be  the  Captain  of  it,  until  provision  could 
be  made. 

As  soon  as  this  h^d  been  agreed  to  by  all,  Afonso  Dalbo- 
querque  appointed  Ruy  de  Brito  Patalim,  Captain  of  the 
Fortress,  and  Fermlo  Perez  Dandrade,  Chief  Captain  of  the 
Sea,  end  aa  Captains  of  the  vessels  which  were  to  remain 
under  his  orders,  Lopo  do  Azevedo,  who  ws.3  to  be  Vice- 
Captain,  Christovilo  Graces,  Aires  Pereira,  Antonio  de 
Azevedo,  Pero  de  Faria,  Christovilo  Mascarenhas,  Vasco 
Fernandez  Coutinho,  and  JoAo  Lopez  Dal  vim.  And 
Antonio  de  Abreu  also  had  orders  to  remain  there  with  his 
Captains,  whenever  ho  returned  from  Maliico.  And  he 
appointed  Euy  de  Araujo — owing  to  the  great  obligation 
which  ho  was  under  to  him — Factor  and  Chief  Alcaide  and 
Overseer  of  the  Fortress;  and  Francisco  de  Azevedo  and 
Pero  Salgado,  Scriveners  of  the  Fortress;  and  Jofl.o  Jorge, 
Receiver  (A  of  the  Supplies,  and  Jacome  Fernandez 

his  Scrivener;  and  Francisco  Cardoso,  Alnioxarife  of  the 
Armoury,  and  Bras  Afonso  his  Scrivener;  and  as  Manager 
for  the  Defunct  and  of  the  Hospital,  Christovilo  DaltnSida, 
and  Diogo  Camacho  for  his  Scrivener,  and  Bastifto  Gallego, 
Melrinho  of  the  Fortress,  And  ho  also  appointed  Governors 
of  the  land  (not,  however,  beyond  tlie  superior  jurisdiction 
of  the  Captain  of  the  Fortress),  of  the  Hindoos,  Ninachatu ; 
and  of  the  Moors  a Caciz^  of  his;  and  v/f  the  Javanese  of 
the  district  of  Dupe,  Regunecerage,  a Moor;  and  of  the 
other  part  of  the  ci^,  Tufto  Calascar,  a Javanese  by  birth ; 
and  he  appointed  Ruy  de  Araujo  to  be  decider  of  their 
disputes  and  diflferences,  and  whenever  the  course  of  justice 
* CaciZj  see  p.  69. 


AF0K80  BAtBOQUlRQUfi. 


167 


required  the*  action  of  a higher  court,  the  Captain  of  tho 
Fortress  was  paramount  over  all. 

This  having  been  thus  arranged,  when  the  merchants  of 
the  country  received  information  that  Afonso  Dalboquerquo 
was  firmly  resolved  to  set  sail  for  India;  they  made  their 
way  to  him,  and  one  among  them,  in  the  name  of  them  all, 
declared  to  him  that  they  had  learned  how  his  Lordship 
desired  to  set  sail  and  leave  them,  for  they  were  astonished 
beyond  measure  that  he  should  leave  an  undertaking  so 
important  and  so  rich  as  was  the  City  of  Malaca  and  go 
away,  for  the  well-being  of  the  city  without  him  at  its  head 
could  not  be  maintained.  And  since  he  had  in  his  hands 
the  government  of  the  largest  city  there  was  in  the  world, 
he  ought  not  to  leave  it  to  destruction  in  favour  of  any 
other  undertaking,  but  if  he  was  going  to  do  so  from  want 
of  money,  they,  for  their  part,  would  give  him  as  much 
gold,  silver,  and  merchandize  as  he  had  need  of,  yea,  and 
they  would  spend  all  the  rest  of  their  property  in  tho  service 
of  the  King  of  Portugal,  and  in  his  service,  and  theroforo 
they  begged  him  earnestly  that  he  would  not  quit  the  city 
until  its  affairs  had  become  more  settled. 

Afonso  Dalboquerque  thanked  them  very  much  for  their 
offers,  giving  them  certain  reasons  why  it  was  necessary 
that  he  should  return  to  India,  but  he  would  promise  that 
hd  Would  quickly  return  to  visit  them,  and  ^’or  tho  security 
and  defence  of  the  city  he  would  leave  the  fortress  provided 
with  plenty  of  artillery,  and  many  Portuguese  Cavaliers  to 
defend  it  against  any  power  in  the  world ; and  for  the 
security  of  the  sea  and  for  protection  of  thoir  merchant 
trade,  a Fleet  w'^h  many  Fidalgoes  and  Cavaliers.  The 
merchants  replied  that  when  he  was  in  Malaca  his  name 
alone  was  sufficient  for  its  defence  and  maintenance  for  a 
hundred  years,  and  therefore  they  begged  ho  would  not 
leave  ^hem,  and  so  they  went  on  enlarging  on  their  subject 
with  good  words  and  praised  of  his  character. 


168 


COMMENTARIES  OF 


Again,  Afonso  Dalboquerque  thanked  them'  for  the  con- 
fidence which  they  reposed  in  him,  and  told  them  that  for 
his  own  part  he  would  bo  very  glad  to  remain  there  to 
perform  what  they  desired  of  him,  but  that  he  was  com- 
pelled to  go  to  India,  because  the  fortress  of  Goa  had  yet  to 
be  completed,  and  he  did  not  know  how  affairs  had  gone 
since  his  departure. 

As  soon  as  this  rudionce  which  he  held  with  the  mer- 
chants was  over,  being  now  quite  ready  for  his  departure, 
he  was  detained  yet  another  day;  for  the  King  of  Pac^, 
whom  he  had  captured  on  the  voyage  from  India  (as  I have 
already  related^),  and  kept  in  his  own  house;  treating  him 
with  all  tho  courtesy  and  ceremony  which  was  due  to  his 
rank,  had  secretly  disappeared  for  two  days,  and  no  one 
knew  whither  be  had  gone. 

Afonso  Dalboquerque,  after  using  all  diligence  to  get  him 
into  his  hands  again,  and  perceiving  that  it  was  an  useless 
search,  took  leave  of  the  captains  and  all  those  who  were  to 
remain  behind,  and  proceeded  to  embark  in  the  ship  Flor 
do  la  Mar^  and  Pero  Dalpoem,  auditor  of  India,  in  the  ship 
Trindade ; and  Jorge  Nunez  de  Liao  in  the  ship  Enxo^ 
hreyas ; and  Simao  Martinz  in  a largo  junk  which  was 
going  to  sail  laden  with  many  kinds  of  merchandise  which 
had  been  taken  at  the  sacking  of  the  city.  And  Simao 
Martinz  took  with  him  in  tho  junk  thirteen  Portug\iese 
and  fifty  men  of  Malabar  from  Cochim  to  form  the  guard ; 
aud  sixty  Javanese  carpenters  of  tho  dockyard,  very  handy 
workmen,  whom  Afonso  Dalboquerque  carried  with  Iheir 
wives  and  children  to  serve  the  King  of  Portugal  at  Cochim 
in  repairing  tho  ships,  because  they  were  ^ery  much  needed 
in  India. 

The  Governor  o^  Pac4,  who  had  risen  up  in  rebellion 

' See  p.  64. 

« Pai'tio  o Govemador  de  Malaca  em  primeyro  de  Dezembio  d'eete 
anno  [1511].-^Como,  /.c.,  p.  268.  ' 


AFONSO  OALBOQUEBQUB. 


169 


against  tlie  king  (as  has  been  already  related),  hearing  that 
Malaca  had  been  taken  by  the  Portuguese,  full  of  fear  of 
Afonso  Dalboquerque,  submitted  himself  to  be  a vassal  of 
the  King  of  Portugal ; and  Afonso  Dalboquerque  received 
him,  because  the  rightful  king  would  not  Accept  his  offers, 
and  from  that  time  forward  tho  governor  was  always  at  the 
service  and  under  the  orders  of  Afonso  Dalboquerque. 


CHAPTER  XXXIX. 

Oration  which  Oatnillo  Portio  made  to  the  Pope  Leo  the  Tenth  in  praise 
of  the  capture  of  Malaca ; and  of  the  victories  gained  by  the  Portu- 
guese in  their  conciuest  of  India. 

This  kingdom  having  now  been  taken,  and  a fortress 
built  in  the  city  of  Malaca,  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque 
immediately  apprised  the  King  D.  Manuel  of  the  state  in 
which  its  affairs  were  placed ; and  the  king,  in  order  to 
render  them  of  greater  importance  (because  this  Oolden 
Chersonese^  is  greatly  celebrated  by  all  authors  both  ancient 
and  modern),  wrote  letters^  to  inform  the  Pope  Leo  the 

* See  p.  71. 

* In  hujus  anni,[1613]  exitu  Rex  Emmanuel  tres  legates  ad  Leonem 
decimum  Fontiiicem  Maximum,  cum  muneribus  regia  magnificentia 
dignis,  iastituit.  Princeps  legationia  Tristanus  Cugna  fuit.  CollegsB  duo 
jurisconsulti  magnse  apud  Lusitanos  auctoritatis  extitere.  Unus  Jacobus 
Paciecus,  alter  Joannes  Faria  nominabatur.  Per  illos  Pontifici  sacras 
vestes  ex  auro,  cum  multis  gemmis  opere  excellenti  perfoctis  dono  misit. 
Vasa  prtetcrea  ex  auro,  atque  monilia  maximi  ponderis  et  prctii  vostibus 
adjecit.  Opus  erat  ejusmodi,  ut  cum  materia  nihil  prctiosiua  excogitari 
posset,  artificium  tamen  ipsam  materiam  multis  partibua  superaret. 

“ Misit  prseterea  elephantum  Indicura  mir®  magnitudinis,  quern  non 
solum  Rom®,  ubi  homines,  post  incUnatum  Roman®  majestatis  ampli- 
tudinem,  illud  animal  nunquam  ‘oculis  aspexerant,  sed  quacumque 
gradum  inferebat,  nemo  circumOuentem  undiqhe  turbam,  admiratione 
obstupefactam,  Bubmovere  poterat.  Panthera  etiam  venatica  missa  fuit, 
quod  munus  hand  scio,  an  olira  Rom®  d^diles,  ciim  ludos  magnificentia- 
silnos  apparabant,  et  pr«tcr  alias  immanes  bcluas,  pantheras  etiam  in 


170 


COHMSKTABIES  OV 


Tenth,  And  when  he  had  been  notified  bjjJbfto  de  Faria^ 
the  Portuguese  Ambassador  who  was  then  at  Rome,  of  the 
great  victories  of  the  Portuguese  which  they  had  gained  in 
those  parts  of  the  world  by  the  assiduity,  valour,  and  spirit 
of  this  great  Afonijo  Dalboquerque,  he  ordered  that  a solemn 
Procession'  should  be  made  in  which  he  himself  took  part ; 

publicis  spectaculia  cxhibebant,  praesture  potuerint.  Ea  namque  maneue- 
facta,  non  in  circo  cum  bestiariis,  sed  in  gylvis  cum  apris  atque  cervia 
prteliom  committebat,  et  principibus  qui  venationibus  oblectantur,  pluri- 
mum  voluptatia  aflFerebat.  Ea  inaidebat  equi  Persici  tcrgo,  integumcntia 
auratis  elegauter  instrati.  Equum  regebat  Persa  venator  eximius,  qui 
ad  id  muniui  obeuudum  ab  Armuzii  rege  cum  equo  et  Panthera  miaaus 
fuerat. 

**  Trietanus  Cugna  ciim  esBct  vir  et  nobilitate,  et  auctoritate,  et  existi- 
matione  non  viilgari  prwditua,  turn  propriis  sumptibus  earn  legationem 
exoruandam  susceperat.  Ducebat  autein  sccuui  tres  iilios  et  cognatorum 
copiam,  aniplanique  familiam  quibus  gtipatus  non  abjecti  Principis  8pe> 
ciem  prse  ge  furebat.  Legationia  gcriba,  Nicolaus  Faria,  (jui  equis  Regiia 
curandis  prseerat,  agebat  e<iuum  pulcherrimum,  ephippiis  aureis,  et  pha- 
lerifl  aureig,  emblenmtig  et  gemmis  maximi  pretii  distinctis  instratum  et 
ornatum,  qui  etiam  Pontifici  donandus  erat.” — Hieron.  Osorii  de  BeVus 
Emtnanuelis  Regis.  Col.  Agr,^  1574,  fol.  297  fr.  Ciaconius,  in  his  Vitte 
Pontijicum  (tom  iii,  a.d,  1513,  cols.  328-9),  repents  this  with  an  interest- 
ing anecdote  of  the  sagacity  of  the  elephant  mentioned  in  the  foregoing 
extracts. 

* “Such  a concurrence  of  great  and  prosperous  events  induced  the 
Pope  to  direct  the  celebration  of  a public  thanksgiving  in  Rome,  which 
was  accordingly  observed  with  extraordinary  pomp  and  splendid  proces- 
sions to  the  churches  of  S.  Maria  del  Popolo  and  S.  Agostino ; m which 
the  pontiff  appeared  in  person,  and  by  the  propriety  and  decorum  which 
always  distinguished  him  on  public  c)ccasion8,  gave  additional  dignity  to 
the  ceremony.  At  the  same  time  he  ordered  Camillo  Portio  to  pronounce, 
in  the  pontifical  chapel,  a iMin  oration  in  praise  of  the  character  and 
actions  of  the  King  of  Portugal,  who  had  communicated  to  him  his 
success,  and  testified  his  dutiful  obedience  to  the  Roman  Court,  and  his 
personal  attachment  to  the  supreme  pontiff. 

“ This  mutual  interchange  of  civility  and  respect  between  the  King  of 
Portugal  and  the  pontiff  was,  howevCr,  rendered  much  more  conspicuous 
by  a splendid  embassy  from  the  Portuguese  monarch,  which  soon  after- 
wards fldnived  at  Rome,  to  the  great  delight  and  astonishment  of  the  in- 
habitants. The  chief  ambassador  on  this  occasion  was  the  odebrated 
Tristano  Cugna,  who  had  himself  held  a principal  command  in  the  ei- 


AFONSO  DALBOQUERQUE. 


171 


and,  on  returning  to  the  Sacred  Palace^  Camillo  Portio/ 
in  the  presence  of  every  one,  made  him  the  following 

pedition  to  the  East,  and  had  acfjuired  great  honotir  by  hia  conduct  and 
courage  in  its  prosecution.  He  was  accompanied  by  Jacopo  Pacheco  and 
Giovanni  Faria,  profesBors  of  the  law.  of  great  eminence  and  autlmrity. 
Three  sons  of  Cugna,  with  many  others  of  his  relatives  and  friends, 
accompanied  the  procession,  wliich  was  mot  at  tho  gates  of  the  city  by  a 
select  body  of  cardinals  and  prelates,  who  conducted  the  strangt'rs  to  the 
palaces  appointed  for  their  residence.  But  tlic  respectability  of  the 
envoys  was  of  less  importance  in  the  eyes  of  the  populace  than  the  sin- 
g\ilar  and  magnificent  presents  for  the  Pope  by  which  tliey  were  accom- 
panied. Among  these  were  an  elephant  of  extraoi-dinary  size,  tw'O 
leopards,  a panther,  and  other  uncommon  animals.  Sev(!ral  Persian 
horses,  richly  caparisoned,  appeared  also  in  the  train,  mounted  by 
natives  of  the  same  country  dressed  in  their  proper  habits.  To  these 
was  added  a profusion  of  articles  of  inestimable  value ; pontifical  vest- 


1 Camillo  Portio,  Porcio,  Fortius,  or  Porcarius,  must  not  be  con- 
founde<i  with  another  personage  of  the  same  name,  who  flourished  later 
in  the  sixteenth  century,  lie  was  a lloinan  of  noble  birth,  a canon  of 
St.  Peter’s,  Rome,  and  appointed  by  Pope  Leo  X,  on  tho  4th  March 
1517,  Bishop  of  Teramo  (Theramum  or  Aprutium),  the  episcopal  city  of 
the  Abruzzi.  He  is  celebrated  as  a poet  and  orator.  (See  Tiraboschi, 
Storia  dclln  Letteratura  llaUaun.  Modena,  1792,  4to,  tom.  vii,  pt.  3, 
p.  1016. — Nuo%'a  BihUotera  Popvlart ; Operc  di  C,  PorztOy  I*.  Giordani 
Torino,  1852,  *8vo,  p.  13. — Ughelli,  ludia  *8*0 era,  vol.  i,  p.  371,  “Vir 
varia  literatura  clarus”.— Kichanl  et  Giraud,  BihliotUquc  Saci'k,  vol. 
xxiv,  p.  427.)  According  to  Giordani,  Camillo  Porcio  died  in  1521. 
Ughelli  and  Richard  place  his  death  in  1522.  The  following  note  is  of 
interest : — 

“ Camillus  Port.ius,  ut  meos  quoque  cives,  in  scenam  banc  inducam, 
quantro  fucrit  celebritatis,  ignorat  nemo,  sive  illo  Romanarn  cathedram 
magno  omnium  stupore,  et  ndmirationo  dect)raret,  sive  pro  rostris  decla- 
maret,  ut  nihil  ejua  dictione  snavius,  nilnl  jncundius,  nihil  expolitius, 
haberetur.  Is  tainen  simulac  ab  Leone  Decimo  l^ontifico  Maximo 
Aprutinm  est  EcclesiaJ  praefectus,  acerbissiirA  diuturni  cujusdam  morbi, 
nulli  medicorum  cogniti,  correptus  inclcmentiu,  posbiuam  miserabili 
cmciatu  menses  plurimos  decubuit  Aftlictatus,  morbi  dcmuni  ejus  trucu- 
lentiH,  et  totius  corporis  doloribus  oppressus,  vircntc  adhuc  a;tate  ani- 
mam  egit,  incredibili  apud  omnes  sui  relicto  desiderio.” — Joavnis  FHerii 
. VaUriaM  BeUunensi^  de  LUeratunm  IvfdkitaU  Libri  Duo.  Amstcl, 
1647,  p.  15. 


172 


COMMENTARIES  OF 


Oration  in  Octolier  of  the  year  one  thousand  five  hundred 
and  thirteen : — 

If  ever  at  any  time,  Most  Blessed  Father,  the  Christian 
people  had  reason  to  give  thanks  to  the  Lord,  and  magnify 
his  strength  and  power  for  an  undertaking  begun  with 
bravery  and  daring,  and  brought  to  a fortunate  end,  this 
year  stands  forth  on  this  account  as  the  most  brilliant 

menta,  adonie<l  with  grid  and  jewels,  vases,  and  other  implements  for 
the  celebration  of  sacred  rites,  and  a covering  for  the  altar,  of  the  most 
exquisite  workmanship.  A herald,  bearing  the  arms  of  the  Portuguese 
sovereign,  led  the  procession.  On  their  arrival  at  the  pontifical  palace, 
W’here  the  Pope  stood  at  the  windows  to  ace  them  pass,  the  elephant 
stopped,  and,  kneeling  before  his  llolineas,  bowed  hiuuelf  thrice  to  the 
ground.  A large  vessel  was  here  provided  and  filled  with  water,  which 
the  elephant  drew  up  into  his  trunk  and  showered  down  again  on  the 
adjacent  multitude,  dispersing  no  small  portion  of  it  among  the  more 
polite  spectators  at  the  windows,  to  the  great  entertainment  of  the 
Pontiff. 

“Six  days  afterwards  the  ambassadors  were  admitted  to  a public 
audience,  on  which  occasion  the  procession  was  repeated.  The  Pope, 
surrounded  by  the  cardinals  and  prelates  of  the  church,  and  attended  by 
the  ambass-'idors  of  foreign  states  and  all  the  officers  of  his  court,  was 
addressed  in  a Latin  oration  by  Pacheco,  at  the  conclusion  of  which 
Leo  replied  to  him  in  the  same  language,  highly  commending  the  king 
for  his  devotion  to  t!)e  Holy  See.  Of  this  opportunity  the  Pontiff  also 
availed  himself,  to  recommend  the  maintenance  of  perfee  among  the 
states  of  Europe  and  the  union  of  their  arms  against  the  Turks,  express- 
ing himself  with  such  promptitude,  seriousness,  and  elegance,  as  to  ob- 
tain the  unanimous  admiration  of  the  amlitors.  On  the  foUoVwmg^-  day 
the  presents  from  the  king  were  brought  into  the  conservatory  of  the 
gardens,  adjoining  the  pontifical  palace,  where,  on  the  introduction  of 
animals  proper  for  that  purpose,  the  wild  beasts  displayed  their  agility 
in  taking,  and  their  ferocity  in  devouring,  their  prey:  a spectacle  which 
humanity  would  have  spared,  but  which  was  probably  highly  gratifying 
to  the  Pontiff,  who  was  devoted  to  the  pleasures  of  the  chase.  The 
Portuguese  monarch  had  intended  to  have  surprised  the  Roman  people 
with  the  sight  of  another  and  yet  rarer  animal,  which  had  not  been 
seen  in  Rome  for  many  ages ; but  the  rhinoceros,  which  he  had  brought 
from  the  East  with  thi/^view,  unfortunately  perished  in  the  attempt  to 
get  him  on  board  the  vessel  prepared  to  transport  hun  to  Italy.” — 
William  Roscoe^s  Life  and  Pontificate  of  Leo  the  Tenth,  Londob,  1846, 
voL  i,  pp,  362,  363. 


AFONSO  DALBOQUEBQUK. 


173 


example  which’ hw  as  yet  occurred,  wherein  our  Lord  God, 
by  reason  of  his  profound  pity  for  his  people,  has  deemed 
it  right  to  increase  their  pleasure  with  fresh  joy,  and  their 
prosperity  with  new  and  universal  occasions  of  rejoicing. 
For  in  addition  to  His  elevation  of  your  holiness  this  year 
to  the  majesty  of  the  pontifical  throne,  more  for  the  universal 
profit  of  Christendom  than  for  any  particular  benefit  to  your 
own  self,  He  yet  further  made 'your  holiness  the  solo  refuge 
and  safeguard  in  matters  almost  hopelessly  ruined,  and  at  a 
time  when  the  whole  world  is  occupied  in  the  prosecution  of 
wars,  in  order  that  with  greater  rejoicings  his  new  choice 
might  be  inaugurated.  At  this  very  juncture  it  was  that 
He  gave  to  the  most  puissant  and  very  fortunate  and  in- 
vincible King  D.  Manuel  of  Portugal  so  many  and  such 
great  victories  and  triumphs  over  his  enemies,  that  one 
may  easily  believe  that  the  Lord  is  fighting  on  our  side ; 
and  indeed  that  in  this  last  brilliant  enterprise,  which  was 
fought  out  victoriously  in  His  name,  He  has  given  us  n sign 
that  from  this  day  forward  we  should  have  confidence  in 
Him  to  confer  upon  us  signal  victories,  if  we  will  only  make 
up  our  determination  to  use  that  prestige  which  belongs 
naturally  to  us,  and  which  is  so  universally  admitted  and 
dreaded  among  barbarian  nations. 

**  Is  it  possible  that  there  may  haply  be  some  ono  who  is 
capable  of  deeming  as  works  performed  by  tho  hands  of 
men  those  deeds  which  have  lately  been  accomplished  by 
the  Portuguese  in  India,  under  tho  captainship  of  tho  valiant 
Afonso  Dalboquerque  ? So  many  cities  of  unmeasured 
wealth  and  immense  strength  entered  by  force  of  arms  ? 
so  many  various  na^wns  conquered  ? so  many  tribes  over- 
come in  battle  ? and  this,  too,  with  a very  disproportionate 
number  of  soldiers,  who  were  always  able  to  come  victoriously 
out  of  every  enterprise  to  which  they  had  devoted  them- 
selves., Yea,  and  more  than  this,  they  compelled  many* 
kitlgs  to  become  tributaries,  after  having  been  reduced  to 


174 


COHMENTABIES  OF 


the  state  of  subjects  by  the  valour  of  the  arms  of  Portugal ; 
and  even  those  who  were  not  reached  by  the  perils  of  the 
war,  in  order  to  secure  their  immunity  from  him,  either  came 
in  person  or  sent  their  ambassadors  with  great  earnestness 
to  sue  for  peace 'and  alliance.  And  for  this  reason  the  noble 
nature  of  these  victories  is  greater  and  more  excellent, 
because  they  are  justly  celebrated,  not  for  the  slaughter  and 
destruction  which  \jraa  so  frequently  dealt  out  to  the  enemy, 
but  for  the  notable  Portuguese  spirit,  whereby  they  were 
gained ; and  it  was  to  this  spirit  that  God  thus  showed  His 
favour ; that  the  victories  of  the  present  age  should  put 
those  of  the  past  ages  out  of  remembrance  in^such  a manner 
that  the  spoils  of  the  one  should  exceed  the  spoils  of  the  other, 
and  yet  with  these  victories  there  should  be  added  so  many 
kings  conquered,  and  all  the  other  potentates  who  were 
unwilling  to  measure  their  strength  against  the  intrepidity 
of  the  Portuguese  arms,  compelled  to  enter  into  an  alliance. 

Wherefore,  Most  Blessed  Father,  your  holiness  proceeds 
with  great  prudence  and  Christian  zeal,  like  all  the  rest  in 
this  respect,  when  for  a victory  of  so  much  importance  as 
this  is  (and  I know  not  if  any  one  could  wish  for  a greater 
one),  which  at  such  a happy  season  our  Lord  has  been 
pleased  to  grant  to  the  most  Christian  King  D.  Manuel, 
you  order  solemn  processions  to  take  place,  and  accompany 
them  in  your  own  person,  in  order  that  due  thanks  may^be 
given  to  the  Lord,  and  to  all  the  saints  for  such  a great  mark 
of  Hia  mercy  as  this  is. 

''For  this  is  not  a victory  which  has  been  gained  over  a 
warlike  tribe,  or  over  a fortified  and  obstinately  defended 
city,  but  over  that  great  and  celebrated  land  of  India, 
wherein,  after  the  subjecting  by  Portuguese  arms  of  the  ex*- 
ceedingly  rich  kingdoms  of  Goa  and  Ormuz,  and  making 
them  tributary,  in  suck  a manner  that  from  the  hands  of 
the  valiant  Captain  Afonso  Dalboquerque,  in  the  i^ame  of 
the  King  of  Portugal,  hia  lotd,  these  kingdoms  received  the 


> AFONSO  DALBOQUEBQUE. 


175 


persons  who  were  appointed  to  govern  them,  now,  as  a result 
of  these  great  yictories  by  sea  as  well  as  by  land,  there -lies 
overthrown  that  most  fertile  and  rich  kingdom  of  Malaca, 
called  by  the  ancients,  on  account  of  its  enormous  wealth, 
Oolden,^  for  they  desired  by  this  appellation  (given  never 
to  any  other  land)  to  signify  the  great  extent  of  its  immense 
sources  of  wealth ; and  not  only  in  the  conquest  of  these 
kingdoms  is  our  mind  occupied  with  the  greatness  of  them, 
but  (and  this  is  of  no  small  importance  in  these  present  times 
in  which  we  live)  we  have  to  bear  in  mind  that  as  for  the 
barbarians  whom  before  this  event  the  report  of  our  prowess 
had  not  reached,  now,  I say,  the  peril  of  these  kingdoms 
terrifies  those  barbarians  to  whose  lands  we  have  opened 
the  roads,  and  of  whom  up  to  the  present  time  we  have  had 
no  knowledge  whatever. 

**  Thus,  for  example,  there  is  thrown  open  to  us  by  the 
conquest  of  the  kingdom  of  Ormuz  the  road  whereby  the 
Holy  House  of  Jerusalem  (the  country  in  which  our  Saviour 
was  bom)  can  again  be  recovered  and  rescued  from  the 
hands  of  those  infidels  who  tyrannically  and  unrighteously 
possess  it,  for  into  their  hearts  we  have  instilled  a dread 
which  makes  them  fear  lest  they  be  compelled  to  share  in 
the  peril  which  has  befallen  their  comrades.  And  in  all 
these  matters  I am  at  a loss  to  decide  to  which  of  two  facts 
I aught  to  give  the  greater  praise,  to  the  z('al  and  good 
fortune  of  the  most  puissant  King  D.  Manuel,  who  with  so 
much  trouble  and  expenditure  of  treasure  has  desired  fo 
extend  the  name  of  Christ  to  the  regions  so  far  distant,  and 
to  nations  foreign  to  our  intercourse,  with  the  intent  that 
where  the  law  of  Christ  had  never  before  been  in  force  there 
might  he  plant  the  fi?g  of  His  Holy  Cross;  or  to  the  spirit, 
understanding,  and  bravery, of  Portuguese  minds,  which 
with  an  effort  of  daring  never  before  witnessed,  and  with  a 
thoroughly  de^rmined  eagerness  to  augment  the  Christian 
» See  p.  71. 


176 


COMMENTARISS  07  > 


religion,  have  passed  over  into  climes  so  different  from  their 
native  land,  and  there  have  been  compelled  to  do  battle, 
not  only  with  cruel  end  inhuman  enemies,  but  also  with 
hunger  itself,  thirst,  cold,  and  heat  insufferable  : and  yet 
with  all  this  to  despise  every  one  of  the  troubles  that  could 
possibly  supervene,  in  order  to  accomplish  the  obligations 
which,  at  the  orders  of  their  king,  they  had  cheerfully  under- 
taken to  perform. 

And  in  these  cptorprises'those  who  will  take  the  trouble 
to  look  into  the  matter  may  easily  perceive  the  extensive 
nature  of  the  Lord’s  mercies,  when  they  bear  in  mind  the 
smallness  of  the  heroic  band}  which  gained  possession  of 
the  whole  of  India.  For  although  thero  were  not  so  many 
as  three  thousand  Portuguese  souls  in  the  whole  of  the 
fleet,  they  overcame  so  many  kingdoms  of  that  country  and 
took  them  by  force  of  arms ; and  so  many  kings,  who  were 
so  terrified  at  the  fame  of  the  Portuguese,  that  they  came 
in  humble  guise  to  beg  for  peace,  while  those  who  were  un- 
willing to  accept  the  terms  of  peace  had  to  receive  by  force 
the  laws  imposed  upon  them  by  the  hands  of  their  con- 
querors ; yea,  and  some  among  them,  whom  it  pleased  the 
Lord  to  enlighten,  received  baptism  and  embraced  the 
Christian  faith,  in  such  a way  that,  even  in  climes  so  remote 
as  these  are,  Christians  were  found  with  Christians : and  as 
the  ultimate  result  of  these  victories,  gained  by  means  of 
the  same  limited  number  of  men,  and  even  fewer  still, — for 
they  were  obliged  to  detach  some  of  the  number  to  form 
the  garrisons  of  the  kingdoms  that  had  been  captured — we 
behold  Malaca  taken,  her  King  conquered,  and  put  to  flight 
with  a small  remnant  of  his  army  that  could  barely  manage 
to  follow  him,  the  greater  part  of  it  having  met  their  death 
by  the  sword ; and  thus  is  this  city  of  such  noble  fame,  the 
capital  of  such  a ri^  kingdom,  in  the  power  of  Christians, 
This,  Most  Blessed  Father,  is  that  Oold^  Ohersonese^ 

* See  p.  71. 


AFONSO  DALBOQUERQCE. 


177 


which  lies  at  tbo  other  end  of  that  great  gulf  wherein  the 
River  Ganges  disfeharges  her  waters  into  the  sea,  so  famous 
for  her  immense  wealth,  that  on  account  of  tho  very  many 
kinds  and  very  great  worth  of  her  merchandize,  which  is 
imported  thither  from  different  countries,  as  well  as  on 
account  of  the  no  less  rich  materials  which  are  exported 
therefrom,  she  stands  in  estimation  of  being  the  noblest 
place  of  tho  whole  of  India ; and  this  is  btit  reasonable,  for 
there  is  not  a single  thing  of  those  which  are  desirable  in 
this  life,  whereof  she  does  not  contain  a very  great  abund- 
ance. 

''  There  reigned  in  Malacaa  King,  who  was,  as  to  his  faith, 
a Moor,  as  to  treasures,  rich  and  powerful,  and  possessed  of  a 
navy,  and  a very  bitter  enemy  of  the  Christian  name,  espe- 
cially of  the  Portuguese,  for  about  two  years  previously  ho 
had  treacherously  sought  the  death  of  a noble  Poriuguoso 
Captain  who  had  arrived  at  this  port,  and  tho  celebrated  Cap- 
tain Afonso  Dalboquorque — (a  name  deserving  of  all  praise 
for  his  illustrious  deeds) — who  at  that  time,  in  tho  name  of 
the  most  puissant  King  D,  Manuel,  governed  India,  having 
pacified  and  established  in  security  the  other  kingdoms  and 
their  fortresses  of  which  in  that  country  on  this  side  of  the 
Ganges,  or  as  the  Portuguese  call  it  ^ inside  tho  cape  of 
^Coinorim',  he  had  gained  possession,  made  up  his  mind  to 
avenge  the  treason  which  the  King  of  Malaca  liad  practised 
towards  the  Portuguese,  and  by  way  of  satisfaction  for  this 
deed  to  deprive  him  of  his  kingdom ; and  thus  having 
arrived  in  good  season  at  Malaca,  he  put  liirnself  in  array 
to  attack  the  city,  not  only  by  land  but  also  by  sea. 

''  The  King  of  the  country,  who  had  never  allowed  his 
thoughts  to  be  disturbed  by  tho  idea  of  such  an  event,  per- 
ceiving himself  not  to  be  so  well  prepared  as  ho  wished  to 
be  for  defendir^g  himself,  thought  it  right  to  resort  to  arti- 
^ce,  and  sent  a message  of  peaceful  import  to  Afonso  Dal- 
boquerquo,  the  spirited  avenger  of  tho  treason  which  had 

VOL.  III.  ^ 


178 


COMMENTARIES  OP 


been  shewn  to  tho  Portuguose,  and  began  with  dilatory 
proceedings  to  lengthen  out  tho  time  for'tlie  settlement  of 
tho  measures  for  peace,  for  which  he  was  pretending  to 
treat,  and  to  temporise  with  him  while,  at  the  same  time,  ho 
continued  to  fortify  himself;  but  these  measures  of  precau- 
tion did  not  escape  tho  notice  of  the  Portuguese,  who  put 
themselves  in  position  for  attacking  tho  city ; and  u^an- 
ning  their  siiiall  craft,  with  breasts  inflamed  with  a spirited 
valour,  swooped  down  upon  tho  coast ; and  bringing  into 
action  tlio  artillery  they  carried  with  them,  began  to  dis- 
perse tho  Moors  HO  that  they  might  effect  an  entrance  into 
tho  city  with  loss  danger  to  themselves.  ..  *• 

''The  King  of  Malaca,  finding  himself  thttown  into  this 
difficulty,  and  that  ho  was  now  driven  into  a position  in 
which  ho  was  couipelled  to  defend  himself  by  force  of  arms, 
and  that  now  artifices  wore  no  longer  of  any  avail,  sets  in 
order  his  defence  with  his  men  behind  their  stockades, 
while  ho  himself  mounted  upon  an  elephant  keeps  on  going 
up  and  down  among  them  urging  them  on,  and  calling 
upon  them  that  they  must  not  think  of  failing  their  country 
in  its  present  need,  and  in  tho  supreme  necessity  which 
had  fallen  upon  it.  And  now  the  Portugueso,  with  a spirit 
overjoyed  and  animated,  had  reached  the  wall,  and  the  gnus 
along  tlie  shore  were  pouring  forth  their  fire,  when  the  in- 
habitants of  the  city  began  to  grow  alarmed,  tlielr  heart 
failed  them,  and  deserting  their  stockades,  which  they  had 
maintained  for  a short  time  only,  commenced  their  flight; 
tho  Portuguese  pursuing  them  with  victonous  exultation, 
and  following  closely  pell-mell  in  the  pursuit  after  the 
routed  enemy,  got  into  the  city,  and  reached  the  very  heart 
of  it,  whore,  upon  n bridge  which  stood  over  a river  along 
which  the  shipping  enters,  running  through  the  midst  of 
tliGL  city,  the  King  had  made  his  last  stand,  nnd  posted  the 
main  force  of  his  army,  and  strengthening  the  defences  ot 
the  stockades  here  more  and  more,  ho  rallied  in  it  those 


AFONSO  DALBOQUEBQUE. 


179 


who  wore  ia  flight  j for  as  the  river  could  not  bo  forded  by 
the  Portuguese,  he  fortified  himself  on  the  bridge. 

Here  it  was  that  the  contest  grew  sharper,  nevertheless 
the  Portuguese,  favoured  with  the  hope  of  victory  (tho 
enemy  being  somewhat  dashed  with  dread  of  the  Portu- 
guese arras)  fought  so  fiercely  with  the  infidels,  that  taking 
no  precautions  against  their  arms,  and  caring  nought  for 
their  elephants  with  the  castles-  full  of  archers,  and  despis- 
ing the  difficulty  of  the  ford,  with  their'  sw«rds  carved  out 
art  open  way  through  the  midst  of  the  enemy,  some  of 
whom  out  of  sheer  despair  threvv  thomsolvos  upon  tho 
weapons  of  the  Portuguese,  while  others  cast  themselves 
into  the  river  to  gain  safety  ; finally,  after  the  space  of  a 
few  hours,  all  were  in  full  flight,  and  the  King,  wounded  as 
he  was,  along  with  them. 

Tho  city  was  then  entered  and  pillaged,  a largo  number 
of  the  enemy  put  to  death.  In  it  was  found  an  immense 
quantity  of  gold  and  silver,  and  they  found  also  very  many 
storeB  and  munitions  of  war,  among  which  there  were  two 
thousand  pieces  of  artillery.  Among  the  spoils  there  wero 
taken  seven  elephants,  caparisoned  for  battle,  with  their 
castles  and  their  harness  woven  with  gold  and  very  richly 
garnished)  so  that  not  only  the  human  beings,  but  even 
tho  brute  beasts,  of  that  kingdom  were  put  under  obedience 
to  the  x’^cA’tuguese  empire. 

**  0 good  God,  0 migbt}^  Lord,  Thine  is  tho  power, ^ 
Thine  the  might;®  Thy  right  hand  hath  conferred  tlio 
valour  ; Thy  right  hand  exalted  us  : for  how  could  so 
strongly  fortified  a city  as  this  have  been  entered,  and 

> “Thine,  O Lord  is  the  greatness,  and  the  power,  and  tiie  glory,  and 
the  victory,  and  the  majesty.’'—!  C’hrou.  xxix,  11;  cf,  also  1 (Jhron. 
xxix,  12 ; Matth.  vi,  13. 

* “ Rulcst  thou  not  over  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  heatlien  V and  in 
^thine  hat'd  is  there  not  power  ami  might,  so  that  none  is  able  to  with- 
stand thee?”-"2  Chron.  xx,  6. 

■'  ’ N 2 ‘ 


180 


COHMUNTAIitES  01' 


BO  powerful  a King  be  cast  ont  from  it.^if  Thou  hadst 
not  given  us  Thy  help  and  Thy  favour.  Not  unto  ns,  Lord, 
not  unto  us,  but  unto  Thy  name  give  glory.  Thou  hast 
broken  the  strength^  of  the  enemy.  Thou  hast  made  the 
races  subject  vuito  us,  and  hast  put  them  under  our  feet. 
Thou  didst  send  forth  thine  arrows.^and  overcamedst  them, 
with  Thy  lightnings  Thou  didst  scatter  them,  Thou  wert 
the  Captain, ‘ Thou  the  Counsellor.'  Thou  didst  strike  fear 
into  our  enemies,  Tliou  madost  them  flee  away.  Not  for  our 
sakes,  Lord,  not  for  onr  sakos,  but  for  the  glory  of  Thy  name. 

“ But  wherefore  do  1 thus  dwell  so  much  upon  the  capture 
of  Malaca,  for  what  was  done  with  the  ruins  of  the  city 
after  it  was  taken  is  no  loss  worthy  of  narration.  Of  it  and  of 
its  mosques  there  was  immediately  constructed  a fortress, 
strong  enough  to  act  as  a check  upon  that  turbulent  people, 
and  Governors  wore  appointed  over  them  every  year,  under 
whose  government  they  might  live,  and  laws  whereby  they 
might  be  uplield,  in  the  dispensation  of  justice,  and  after 
this  treaties  of  peace  were  concluded  with  many  kings  of 
countries  adjacent  to  it,  as,  for  example,  the  Kings  of  Pegd, 
Samatra,  Pedir,  Pacd,  the  Javanese,  and  lastly,  oven  the 
Chinese  of  the  far  distant  East,  so  celebrated  on  account  of 
their  merchant  wares. 

“And  in  order  that  there  should  not  be  wanting  to  the 
Portuguese  an  occasion  of  consolidating  their  fordesi'and 
by  means  of  them  extending  that  empire  which  had  been 
by  their  employment  acquired,  the  illustrious  Afonso  Dalbo- 


1 .•!  will  destroy  the  strength  of  the  kingdoms  of  the  heathen.”- 


Hag.  ii,  22. 

« “ He  shall  subdue  the  people  under  us, 


uud  the  nations 


under  our 


■ “ His  arrow  shall  gp  forth  as  the  lightning.”— Zaoh.  ix,  14.  " 
forth  lightning,  and  scatter  them ; shoot  out  th.nc  arrows,  and  destroy 


God  himself’ is  with  us  for  our  captain.”— 2 Chron.  Jul.'S. 
» Who  hath  been  his  counsellbr.”— Rom.  xi,  J14. 


AFONSO  DALBOQUBRQUE. 


181 


querque,  having  sailed  away  from  Malaca/  returned  to  Goa ; 
and  how  shall  1 describe  the  victory  which  ho  gairfed  ? 
For  it  does  not  appear  to  be  so  much  a victory  as  a Divine 
dispensation  which  would  have  affairs  turn  out  thus ; for 
this  illustrious  captain,  having  gaiuad  possession  of  tho  island 
and  kingdom  of  Goa  by  force  of  arms  upon  two  occasions, 
leaving  it,  at  the  time  of  his  setting  out,  in  tho  most  fortitied 
condition  that  he  could,  while  ho  prosecuted  his  voyage  to 
Malaca,  and  visited  the  remaining  fortresses  of  India.  Tho 
Hidalcao,  who  had  been  lord  of  tJiia  city,  seeing  that  Afonso 
Dalboqnerque  was  no  longer  at  hand  to  dofond  it,  came 
down  and  besieged  it  with  a groat  force  of  soldiers  on  foot 
and  horse,  and  built  a fortress  close  to  an  arm  of  tho  sea, 
which  runs  up  into  the  land  and  surrounds  tho  island  ; uud 
so  causing  his  men  to  pass  over  to  the  island,  ho  instructed 
them  with  constant  skirmishes  and  surprises  to  tiro  out 
the  Portuguese  who  were  left  in  the  fortress,  and  these, 
besieged  as  they  were  by  so  powerful  an  enemy,  found 
themselves  in  great  straits  and  necessity.  But  in  accord- 
. anco  with  our  Lord's  will,  at  the  very  time  while  they  were 
in  this  diflSculty,  the  fleet,  which  was  returning  from 
Malaca  with  the  honour  of  such  a great  victory,  came  into 
sight  ^ and  at  its  coming  so  great  was  the  fear  of  tho 
enemies,  that  without  waiting  for  the  Portuguese  forces  to 
disembark,  they  raised  the  siege  and  hastened  away  with 
as  muchbj^ste  as  they  bad  first  shown  at  their  coming. 

**  We  read  concerning  that  groat  Alexander,  Prince  of 
Macodon,  that  when  ho  arrived  at  tho  country  of  India,  and 
had  assaulted  a fortified  city  well  defended  by  its  inhabit- 
ants, he  held  it  to  b^  of  such  great  iinportance,  and  it  ap- 
peared to  bo  so  successful  a matter  to  have  captured  the 
place,  that  his  soldiers  did  not  fail  to  rdoclare  that  he  was 

* From  this  ^iaragraph  t<)  the  end  of  tiie  oration,  the  orator  deals  with, 

' events  connected  with  Portuguese  rule  in  India,  which  the  CommentarUa 
arc^  about  to  describe  in  the  succeeding  chapters  of  the  volume. 


182 


COMMENTARIES  OP 


more  valiant  than  Hercules.  If  this  be  so,  what  triumphs, 
what  sovereign  honour  is  due  to  the  King  D.  Manuel,  who 
has  subjects  by  whose  hands  and  might  ho  has  not  only 
conquered  by  force  of  arras  a city  of  India,  but  with  a con- 
tinued round  of^  his  victories  kept  on  going  about  India 
itself — a country  never  beheld  by  the  Romans,  unknown  to 
the  Goths,  and  in  vain  assailed  on  many  occasions  by  the 
famous  Sesostris,^  King  of  I'lgypt,  Cyrus, ^ and  Semiramis.^ 
'‘When  Augustus  Cmsar  had  become  monarch  he  esteemed 
it  as  the  greatest  happiness  ho  could  enjoy,  among  his  other 
pleasures,  to  be  visited  by  the  kings  of  India  with  presents, 
and  that  they  sent  him  their  ambassadors  to  rsk  for  peace. 

Who  can  well  recount  the  great  services  which  have 
been  offered  to  the  all-unconquered  King  D.  Manuel  by  the 
kings  of  India  ? the  tribute  which  they  have  paid  him  ? the 
amity  which  they  have  besought  of  him  ? and,  lastly,  the 

» “Sed  Gennanicus viisit  veterum  Thebarum  magna  vestigia: 

et  manebant  structis  inolibus  litcias  iEgyptiae,  priorom  opulentiain  com- 
plexae:  jussusque  o seriioribus  sacerdotum  patrium  sermonem  inkrpre- 
tari,  refercbat,  ‘habiUis.se  quondam  scptingenta  millia  setate  militari: 
atque  eo  cum  exercitu  Regem  Riiamsen,*  Libya,  iLthiopia,  Mkdis- 
QUE  et  Peusis  et  Ractijiano  ac  Scytha,  potitum’,”  etc.— Tacit., 
Annal.y  ii,  60. 

» This  refers  to  the  inheritance  by  Cyrus  of  tlic  territory  of  his  uncle 
Cyaxaras,  who  thereby  became  master  of  nearly  all  Asia.  His  empire 
included  Babyloii,  Assyria,  the  Medes,  the  Persians,  and  Asia  Minoi"*.' 

3 Semiramis,  (^ueen  of  Assyria,  subjugated  Arabia,  Egypt,  pai-t  of 
Ethiopia  and  Libya,  and  the  whole  of  Asia  as  far  as  the  Indus ; but, 
having  experienced  a check  on  the  banks  of  that  river,  did  not  push  her 
conquests  any  further  in  that  direction. 


* Valpy’s  Delphin  edit,  of  1821,  has  the  following  note  here,  to  shew 
the  identity  of  Sesostris  and  llamesos:  “ Eadem  dicimtur  de  Sesotride  a 
Diodoro.  * Armais’  apud  Josephum^  unde  hos  Reges  depromsit  Euse- 
bius frater  Scsothios,  ipso  fratre  expedirionem  in  Asiam  faciente,  invasit 
regnum  AOgypti,  etc.  Iste  Sesotiiios  trinominis  fuit,  teste  Manethone, 
VowUua  enitn  eat  Ramesses  et  prjeterea  iEoYPTOS.  Sed  Joseghus  haec 
nomina  permiscuit.  Nam  SESOXtt^is  Josephi  est  SesOstris  Herodoti  et' 
hKJSoosTis  Diodori.’’ 


AFONSO  DALfiOQUEBQUE. 


183 


terms  of  vass^ilttge  wbicb  almost  all  of  tbom  bave  boon  com- 
pelled to  accept'  at  tbe  band  and  by  tbe  might  of  this  illus- 
trious captain  ? For  apart  from  those  who  by  force  of  arms 
Afonso  Dalboquerque  bad  rendered  tributary,  there  re- 
inained  not  a single  king  of  India  by  whom  ho  was  not  ap- 
proached with  services  of  an  infinite  importance ; by  the 
King  of  Cambaya,  by  the  powerful  King  of  Narsiuga,  who 
when  he  was  apprised  of  the  victory  of  Malaca  transmitted 
by  his  ambassadors  a cup  of  gold,  and  a golden  sword,  with 
a ruby  of  inestimable  value  set  in  the  handle,  and  sent 
word  to  beg  that  Afonso  Dalboquerque  would  think  fit 
graciously  to  .make  use  of  him  and  of  his  kingdom.  But 
wherefore  do  I tarry  in  relating  the  gold  and  the  precious 
stones,  and  articles  of  value  which  the  infidels  sent  to  him? 
I will  pass  on  to  what  is  of  far  greater  importance.  The 
celebrated  Presto  Joao,  lord  of  the  whole  of  Ethiopia  which 
lies  below  Egypt,  in  order  to  gain  him  over  as  his  friend, 
sent  him  not  gold,  nor  precious  stones,  but  ho  sent  him  that 
which  he  held  in  much  greater  estimation,  and  which  Afonso 
Dalboquerque  himself  valued  far  more  highly,  and  this  was 
a large  piece  of  the  wood  of  the  True  Cross and  with  it 
ho  sent  word  to  say  that  ho  felt  he  was  justified  in  thus 
sending  him  that  part  of  the  True  Cross-  wherein  we  have 
been  redeemed,  because  ho  had  by  force  of  arms  unfoldod 
the  banner  of  the  Holy  Cross  so  far  away  from  his  father- 
land. 

^^Ilistoriaus  write  that  Demetrius,  the  son  of  Antigonus, 
who  was  the  successor  of  Alexander  in  the  lordship  of 
Macedonia,  on  account  of  his  assiduity  in  capturing  cities, 
was  called  Poliorcetes,  which  iu  the  Greek  languagp  signifies 
the  taker  of  cities.  What  name  shall  wo  give  then  to  the 
excellent  captain,  Afonso  DAlboquercpie,  since  he  has  taken 

» Vera  Cr<d.  This  adjective  is  very  rarely  U6e<l,  except  in  conncctiow 
* with  CK-uz,  and  not  always  then,  as  below. 

Verdadtini  Cruz. 


184 


COMMENTARIES  OP 


SO  many  cities,  conquered  such  kingdoms,  dispersed  so  many 
armies  ? What  happiness  is  there  which  cab  be  compared 
to  that  of  a king  who  is  the  lord  of  such  a subject,  who  by 
force  of  arms  destroyed  tho  most  powerful  kingdom  of 
Calicut  ? Did  hev.not  compel  the  King  of  Narsinga,  mighty 
as  he  was,  with  all  his  vassals,  and  tho  treasure  of  kingdoms, 
and  abundance  of  elephants,  to  come  and  sue  for  peace  from 
the  King  of  Portugal  ? Did  ho  not  force  the  King  of 
Cambaya  to  accept  terms  of  peace?  Did  he  not  restore 
their  kingdoms  to  tho  Kings  of  Cochim  and  Cananor  after 
that  he  had  beaten  them  in  battle  ? Did  he  not  deliver 
from  their  heavy  thraldom  tho  Christians  ^who  lived  in 
India  ? Did  he  not  gain  tho  kingdom  of  Ormuz  ? the  king- 
dom of  Goa?  the  kingdom  and  Island  of  Ceylon?  And,  Instly, 
not  satisfied  with  so  many  victories,  did  not  the  powerful  King 
Dom  Manuel  send  him  to  prosecute  tho  war  against  the  grand 
Sultan  of  Egypt,  and  pass  tho  Red  Sea  ? And  in  order 
thot  there  shosdd  not  be  any  parts  of  tho  world  to  which 
his  victories  did  not  extend,  did  he  not  take  the  noble  city 
of  in  Africa  ? 

**  All  whicli  victories  and  most  auspicious  successes  of 
the  most  invincible  King  Dom  Manuel  are  just  so  much  the 
more  worthy  of  pi*aiso  and  honour,  in  proportion  as' ’we  our- 
selves deserve  the  opprobrium  of  mankind,  for  he  labours 
for  no  other  object  than  to  extend  throughout  the  wbVldtiie 
]^\iith  of  Christ,  which  has  been  entrusted  to  us  as  the 
righteous  and  universal  aim  of  all  our  exertions,  while  we 
are  all  occupied  and  overburdened  in  our  attempts  to 
avenge  private  injuries  : he  attacks  intidol  enemies,  we  are 
fighting  against  one  another;  he  acqivres  for  himself  new 
kingdoms  and  provinces^  wo  by  our  romissness  are  losing 

' or  the  ancient  Busupiny  a walled  town  and  port  of 

Alorocco,  to  the  north  of  Mogador,  taken  ty  the  Portugaese  in  1608, 
ajid  abandoned  in  TGll.  See  Osorius,  lib,  v,  ad  init.^  for  tho  nltirative 
of  the  evontb  connected  with  the  PortiigueBc  conquest  of  this  town.  ^ 


AFONSO  DALBOQUERQUR. 


185 


' wliafc  wo  airpody  possess,  and  we  shall  lose  more  and  more 
if  we  do  not  listen  to  the  Lord,  who  calls  us  every  day,  hnd 
cries  out  to  us  to  awaken. 

**  Consider,  lords,  I entreat  you  by  your  faith,  how  many 
and  how  serious  losses  has  the  Christian  religion  suffered 
for  the  last  sixty  years  in  these  parts.  Are  they,  perad- 
veiiture,  things  that  we  can  possibly  forgot  ? Can  we  recall 
them  to  mind  without  great  pain  ? What  of  Constantinople?^ 
What  of  Negroponte?^  What  of  Lepanto?®  What  of 
Modon  What  of  Durazzo  ?^  What  of  the  other  cities, 

‘ Mahomet  II,  son  and  successor  of  Amuratli,  who  was  raised  to  the 
Ottoman  throne  ih  the  twentieth  year  of  liis  ago  in  1451,  conceived  the 
design  of  achieving  the  conquest  of  the  Greek  Empire,  by  the  taking  of 
Constantinople.  He  succeeded  in  overcoming  all  the  difficulties  which 
obstructed  this  enterprise,  in  which  several  of  his  predecessors  had  failed. 
At  the  head  of  an  army  of  300,000  combatants,  supported  by  a fleet  of 
300  sail,  he  appeared  before  that  capital,  and  commenced  the  siege  on 
the  sixth  of  April,  1453.  The  besieged,  having  only  frota  8,000  to 
10,000  men  to  oppose  the  superior  force  of  the  enemy,  yielded  to  the 
IKDwerfuI  and  redoubled  efforts  of  the  Turks,  after  a vigorous  defence  of 
fifty-three  days.  The  city  was  c.arried  by  assault  on  the  29th  of  May, 
and  delivered  up  to  the  unrestrained  pillage  of  the  soldiers.  Constantine, 
the  last  of  the  Greek  emperors,  peri8he<i  in  the  first  onset,  and  all  the 
inhabitants  were  carried  into  slavery.  In  the  short  space  of  six  or  seven 
hours  the  Turks  had  cleared  the  city  entirely  of  all  its  inhabitants.  This 
conquest  was  follow'^d  by  that  of  Servia,  Bosnia,  Albania,  Greece,  and 
the  whole  of  the  Peloponnesus  or  Moroa,  as  well  as  most  of  tlie  islands 
of  tilb  Ai'C'liipelago.  The  Greek  Empire  of  Trebizond,  on  the  coast  of 
Asia  Minor,  submitted  in  like  manner  to  the  law  of  the  conqueror  iu 
1466.  Koch: 

* Nejji'oponte^  tlie  ancient  EuUrn^  wrested  by  the  Turks  from  the 
Venetians  in  1470. 

» Lepaiito,  the  ancient  NaupactuSy  west  of  Athens,  on  the  nortliern  aide 
of  the  Gulf  of  Lepanto.  The  Turks  besieged  the  city  in  1475  without 
success,  but  obtained  possession  of  it  in  1498,  The  city  was  reconquered 
by  the  Venetians  in  1687,  but  they  lost  it  again  in  1699. 

* Modoiij  the  ancient  Methane,  a fortified  towi^  in  Messenia,  on  a rocky 
projection  into  the  sea  south-west  of  Tripolitza.  It  has  an  octagonal 
tower  built  u^on  an  isolated  rock,  A Venetian  possession,  probably* 

•capturetf  and  held  by  the  Turks  at  this  period. 

Durazzo,  the  ancient  Epidamuus.  and  Dyrrachium,  a maritime  town 

a '•t 


186 


COMMENTARIES  OF 


which  to  our  deep  disgrace  are  in  the  power  of  the  Turks  ? 
What  do  we  look  for?  except  that  they  should  take  us 
asleep,  and  destroy  ua  while  wo  are  unprepared,  and  kill 
us  before  we  cau  put  ourselves  on  our  guard.  Even  now 
they  are  making  an  entry  into  Hungary ; even  now  they 
are  making  war  in  Sclavonia ; even  now  they  scour  the  sea 
unchallenged ; even  now  they  are  seeking  to  sieze  upon 
Italy. 

Now,  therefore,  Most  Blessed  Father,  for  you  have  come, 
as  it  were  a star  of  salvation  in  the  midst  of  this  unsupport- 
ablo  misery,  take  precautions  against  this,  pacify  these  dis- 
cordant motives,  which  actuate  the  Princes  of  Christendom, 
put  down  for  ever  this  miserable  war  which  is  raging  among 
them,  for  no  possible  good  can  come  of  it ; put  aside  all 
animosity,  so  that  when  all  are  as  friends  again  the  arms 
which  one  party  have  prepared  against  the  other,  combined 
together,  may  be  turned  against  the  common  enemy, ^ to 
the  end  that  when  he  is  overcome,  and  we  have  recovered 
the  Holy  House  in  union  with  the  King  Dorn  Manuel  (who  is 
sending  twelve  thousand  men  under  command  of  the  Duke 
of  Bragan9a,  his  son-in-law,  over  to  Africa),  if  we  turn  out 
victorious  we  may  lift  up  unto  the  Lord  a trophy  of  the 
victory  which  he  has  given  to  us  over  barbarous  nations, 
and  those  may  be  put  to  confusion  who  worship  idols,  and 

of  Albania,  to  the  south  of  Scutari.  In  the  middle  ages  this  town  was 
the  seat  of  a Duchy  held  by  the  house  of  Anjou-Sicily."  The  Sultan 
Bajazet  U (1481-1612),  reunited  it  to  the  Turkish  Empire. 

’ In  an  assembly  held  by  Tope  Pius  II  at  Mantua  in  1469  he  had, 
upwards  of  sixty  years  before  the  delivery  of  this  oration,  proposed  a 
general  association  among  the  powers  of  the  West  against  the  Turks. 
A crusade  was  published  by  his  orders,  and  ho  Was  on  the  point  of  setting 
out  in  person  at  the  head  of  the  expedition  when  he  was  suddenly  cut  off 
by  death,  in  1 164,  at^  Ancona,  where  he  had  appointed  the  general 
rendezvous  of  the  confederate  troops.  This  event,  added  to  the  terror 
i which  the  arms  of  Sultan  Mahomet  II  had  created  among  the  Western 
nations,  dist^oncerted  the  plans  of  the  crusaders,  and  was  theiueans  of* 
dissolving  their  confederacy.  ' 


AFONSO  DALBOQUBRQUE. 


187 


put  their  trust,  in  vain  gods,  and  that  they  may  know  the 
name  of  the  Lord,  and  admit  that  He  alone  is  the  Mighty 
One  over  all  the  world, Amen. 


CHAPTER  XL. 

The  proceedings  of  the  Portuguese  in  Goa  with  the  Captains  of  the 
HidalcSo,  who  came  and  besieged  the  city  after  the  departure  of  the 
great  Afonso  Dalboquenjuc  for  Malaca. 

The  HidalcSLo  having  recalled  to  mind  that  which  the  great 
Afonso  Dalboqncrque  had  sent  to  declare  to  his  father  (while 
that  commander  was  lying  in  the  river  of  Goa,  as  has  been 
already  related,  when  he  was  no  longer  able  to  restrain  his 
temper)  that  he  should  yet  see  his  words  come  to  pass,  and 
the  city  in  the  power  of  the  Christians,  and  Milrrhao,*  the 
Hindoo,  carrying  on  the  government,  and  farming  the 
revenues  of  the  mainland  districts ; and  having  brought 
himself  to  imagine  that  the  season  was  favourable  to  get 
possession  of  his  city  again,  on  account  of  the  departure  of 
Afonso  Dalboquerque  for  Malaca,  he  sent  one  of  his  captains, 
who  was  called  Pulatecfto,*  with  a force  of  infantry  and  horse- 
men, to  make  their  way  down  against  Milrrhao,  and  cast 
him  forth  out  of  the  country,  and  endeavour  as  much  as  ho 
could  to  capture  Timoja,  who  was  in  company  with  Milrrhao, 
and  as  soon  as  ho  had  got  thorn  into  his  hands  to  remain 

1 Milrrhao;  the  latter. part  of  this  name  is  the  title  Rao^  used  by  the 
Hindoos  for  a chief  or  prince,  probably  derivwl  from  Raja.  Among  the 
Mahrattaa  it  is  a title  for  diHtingiUHbed  persons,  whether  military  or 
civil,  and  is  assumed  by  a cast-e  of  SudniS  pretending  to  be  derived  from 
the  primitive  Lshatrh/a^  or  military  caste.  He  is  called  Merlao  in  the 
early  part  of  this  volume.  See  chapter  vi. 

* Pulatecdo;  here,  as  is  frerjuently  the  case  in  this  work,  the  name  and 
title  of  the  person  are  combined.  Piikid^  or  Fukul^  are  not  unknown  as 
personal  names  in  Oriental  literature  ; Cdo  is  Khan^  a title  borne  by  Mo-* 
hammadan  nobles,  especially  when  of  Persian  or  Pathau  descent;  it  is 
also  a common  adjunct  to  Afghan  or  Pathan  names. 


188 


COMMISNTAKIGS  OV 


quiet  as  ho  was,  and  wait  until  he  should  receive  instruc- 
tions how  to  proceed,  Pulatecao,  having  set  forth  on  his 
expedition  with  his  camp,  as  soon  as  Milrrhao  received  in- 
formation of  his  intended  attack,  he  proceeded  to  get  ready 
and  wait  for  him  with  five  thousand  native  peons  and  fifty 
mounted  men,  and  sent  forward  Hicarrhau^  to  defend  a 
pass  in  the  mountain  range  which  the  enemy  had  to  traverse, 
but  he  was  so  slow  about  tliis  that  when  he  reached  the 
pass  ho  found  that  Pulatecaio  had  already  taken  possession 
of  it ; and  Pulatecfto  with  all  his  men  fell  upon  him,  and 
routed  him,  and,  pursuing  him  hotly,  killed  him  in  his 
flight,  and  a largo  portion  of  the  trton  who  v ere  with  him  ; 
and,  just  as  he  was,  without  waiting  for  anything,  he  fell 
upon  Milrrhao’s  camp,  and  put  him  to  rout  without  any  loss 
of  time.  And  Milrrhao,  perceiving  himself  to  be  thus  worsted, 
and  having  no  hope  of  any  succour,  at  the  advice  of  Timoja 
would  not  return  to  Goa,  but  turned  his  steps  towards  Nar- 
singa,  and  when  ho  arrived  at  Ihsnaga,  whore  the  King  of 
Narsinga  lived,  ho  met  with  a very  favourable  reception, 
and  there  it  was  that  Timoja  died,  shortly  after  arriving 
there;  and  Milrrhao,  after  the  lapse  of  somo  days,  having 
received  a report  from  Ouor  that  his  brother,  who  had  risen 
up  and  taken  po.ssession  of  that  kingdom,  was  dead,  begged 
permission  of  the  king  to  depart,  and  proceeded  to  talre  pos- 
session of  that  kingdom,  and  always  remained  a staunch 
adherent  of  the  King  of  Portugal. 

Pulatecilo,  when  ho  found  that  he  had  gained  this  victory, 
and  was  in  possession  of  the  lands  of  Goa,  forgetting  all 
that  the  Hidalcilo  had  ordered  him  to  do,  desired  to  follow 
up  his  good  fortune,  and  prepared  certain  rafts  and  boats 
which  he  found  at  hand,  and  without  meeting  with  any  re- 
sistance, crossed  ovtr  to*the  Island  of  Goa,  and  fortified  his 
position  in  Benastarim,  which  position  Rodrigo  ,Jtabelo,  who 
was  the  captain  of  the  city,*  either  from  carelessness  from*. 

> Hicarrhau;  he  is  called  karao  in  chapter  vi.  * See  p.  4^. 


AFONSO  DALBOQUERQUE. 


189 


being  occupied  with  other  matters,  which  ho  considered 
rnoro  necessary,  bad  not  fortified,  although  Afonso  Daibo- 
querqiie  had  commanded  him  to  do  so  before  his  departure, 
for  it  was  a place  of  passage,  and  a principal  pass  leading 
from  the  mainland  to  the  Island  of  Goa. 

As  soon  as  Pulatecao  had  fortified  Benastarim,  with  the 
determination  of  maintaining  the  military  position  there,  he 
made  an  incursion  through  the  neighbouring  Hindoo  villages, 
destroying  and  burning  everything  tint  ho  found  there. 
But  when  Rodrigo  Rabelo  was  informed  of  this  he  sallied 
out  of  tho  city  with  iliirty  mounted  men,  and  #the  aged 
Alguazil  of  Chyianor  with  four  hundred  Naires  arrived  with 
drawn  swords  and  shields,  whom  Dingo  Corroa  had  sent  up 
to  his  assistance,  when  ho  heard  tho  nows  of  tho  coming  of 
the  nidalcS-o’s  forces,  fell  upon  Piilatcc^io  very  valiantly  and 
■ worsted  him,  and  killed  fifteen  fiundred  of  his  Turks  and 
0ora(;ono3.  Nevertheless,  this  sudden  accession  of  good 
luck  caused  Rodrigo  Rabelo  to  despise  the  enemies  whom 
bo  had  overcome,  and  ho  set  himself  in  hot  pursuit  after 
them  with  his  mounted  men.  The  Turks  finding  themselves 
pressed  by  ours,  rallied  a party  of  about  .sixty  at  some  old 
ruins  of  walls,  which  were  on  a hill,  in  order  to  escape  the 
onrush  of^our  men.  Rodrigo  Rabelo  got  up  to  them,  and 
engaged  them,  but  as  tho  place  where  they  stood  was  some- 
what uphill,  and  difficult  to  enter  on  horseback,  the  Turks 
defended  themselves  with  such  succe.ss  that  they  killed  him 
* and  Manuel  da  Cunha  who  were  in  the  van. 

Whan  the  remainder  of  tho  Portuguese  force  saw  they 
were  left  without  a captain,  they  returned  again  with  news  of 
this  sad  disaster  to  the  city,  in  which  there  arose  much 
sadness  for  the  death  of  Rodrigo  Rabelo,  because  he  was 
a very  daring  Captain,  and  of  singijlar  bravery.  And 
Pulatecao,  with  the  remainder  of  his  forces,  retired  back 
Benestanm,  determined  to  make  war  upon  the  city.^ 
Thp  greater  number  of  oun  party,  who  did  not  wish 


190 


COHHBKTARIES  Olf 


that  Francisco  Pantojo^  who  was  entitled  to  the  succes- 
siotf  because  he  was  chief  Alcaide  of  the  fortress,  should 
become  Captain,  after  some  dissensions  had  amongst  them- 
selves elected  as  their  Captain  Diogo  Mendez  de  Vascon- 
celos,  whom  Afonso  Dalboquorque  had  left  captive  in  the 
kcep^,  for  the  reasons  already  narrated.  As  soon  as  this 
election  was  made,  they  all  proceeded  to  the  castle,  and 
loosed  him,  and  delivered  aver  to  him  the  government  of 
the  city,  with  an  ot-th  which  they  all  took  before  him,  that 
they  would  obey  him  as  the  representative  of  the  proper 
person  of  Afonso  Dalboquerque,  until  he  himself  should 
make  such  arrangements  in  this  matter  as  shopld  seem  best ; 
and  as  soon  as  Diogo  Mendez  de  Vasconcelos  was  in  pos- 
session of  the  captainship,  he  wrote  to  Manuel  do  Lacerda, 
who  was  making  his  way  as  chief  Captain  of  a fleet  against 
Calicut,®  giving  him  an  account  of  all  that  had  occurred/ 
and  desiring  him  to  come  back  to  help  him. 


CHAPTER  XLI. 

How  tho  Hidalcao,  on  learning  that  his  Captain  had  made  an  entry  into 
the  Island  of  Goa  and  taken  Benastarira  without,  permission, 
ordered  Ro9alcilo  to  take  it  from  him,  and  what  passed  thereupon. 

Directly  that  Manuel  de  Lacerda  received  no\>3  Lom 
Diogo  Mendez  of  the  trouble  in  which  he  was  involved,  he 
left  off  guarding  the  coast  of  Calicut,  and  came  on  with  all 
his  fleet  and  people  to  relieve  Goa,  and  there  he  faund  all 
the  city  in  great  alarm  at  the  nows  that  was  going  about 
of  the  approach  of  Ro(^aldlo,  principal  Captain  of  the  Hi- 
dalcfto;  with  a numerous  force  of  men,  and  much  artillery. 
And  in  order  that  tl^ey  should  hot  be  taken  unprepared,  and 
at  a disadvantage,  they  hurried  on  with  great  rapidity  the 


‘ See  p.  43. 

■ See  oh.  ix,  at  end.  * 


> See  p.  63. 


AFONSO  DALBOQCBRQUE. 


i9r 

fortification  of  the  city,  and  removal  of  the  stockades,  and 
collection  of  provkiona,  before  winter  should  come  on,  and 
at  this  juncture  there  arrived  Diogo  Fernandez  de  B(!*jawith 
his  fleet  and  forces,  whom  Afonso  Dalboquerquo,  just  before 
he  sailed  to  Malaca,  had  sent  off  to  Ornluz,  and  this  greatly 
inspirited  our  men. 

The  Hidalcao,  when  ho  heard  how  Pulatecao  had  entered 
into  the  Island  of  Goa,  and  was  in  possession  of  Benasta- 
rim,  fearing  what  he  might  do  next,  because  ho  was  a 
restless  character,  who,  after  the  loss  of  Goa,  had  risen  up  in 
rebellion  against  him,  and  would  not  obey  him,  as  he  always 
used  to  do  in  ^<?spect  of  the  revenue  of  the  land,  sent  one 
of  his  principal  Captains,  in  whom  he  had  great  confidence, 
who  was  called  Ro^alcllo,  with  a large  force  of  men  and 
guns  against  Goa,  with  orders  to  do  his  best  to  eject  him. 

PulatccS-o  was  not  pleased  at  the  arrival  of  RcQalcfto,  but 
considered  himself  deeply  injured  by  the  Hidalcao  sending 
another  Captain  upon  that  business,  when  ho  himself  had 
gained  the  entry  into  the  island ; and  what  provoked  him 
more  than  all  was  that  it  was  RoQalcSlo,  with  whom  he  was 
not  on  very  friendly  terras,  and  on  this  account  he  would 
not  obey  his  orders.  Now,  as  Ro9alcao  was  a discreet  man, 
and  perceived  that  this  matter  could  not  be  managed  by 
forcible  means,  he*  made  up  his  mind  to  make  use  of  our 
people  io  gain  his  purpose,  and  with  a most  profound  dis- 
simulation availed  himself  of  the  following  artifice. 

There  came  in  his  retinue  Joao  Machado^  with  fifteen 
Portuguese  who  had  been  taken  prisoners  with  Fornao 
Jacome,  when  his  ship  went  ashore  wherein  he  had  sot  out 
from  Qaeotor^,  as  has  been  already  narrated,  and  among  the 
company  of  these  captives  came  one  Duarte  Tavares, 
esquire  of  the  Count  of  Abrantes,  whom  the  Turks  took 
prisoner  m the  Island  of  Choram,*  and  because  this  Duarte 

» See  vol.  II,  ch.  xxxix. 

2 See  vol.  II,  lutroduction,  p.  cv. 


192 


COMMSNTARISS  OF 


Tavares  was  a man  of  credit  with  them,  Rogalcao  sent  him 
with  a communication  to  Diogo  Mendeii,  Captain  of  the 
Island  of  Goa,  to  declare  to  him  that  the  Hidalcfto,  his  lord, 
greatly  desired  to  have  peace  and  friendship  with  the  King 
of  Portugal,  and  was  very  much  annoyed  at  What  Pulatecfto 
had  done,  and  had  therefore  sent  him  thither  with  a force 
to  get  him  into  his  hands ; but,  on  arrival  at  Benastarim,  he 
had  found  him  out  of  his  reach,  and  in  the  attitude  of  one 
who  had  risen *mphn  rebellion;  therefore  RogalcS/O  desired 
him  graciously  to  assist  in  casting  him  out,  for  the  Hidalcfto 
did  not  wish  to  make  war  upon  the  Portuguese,  but  desired 
peace  and  friendship. 

Diogo  Mcndoz,  not  bearing  in  mind  that  the  King  of 
Portugal  would  be  bettor  served  if  he  assisted  PulatocS-o, 
who  was  a man  with  an  adventurous  spirit,  a Turk  by  birth, 
who  had  risen  up  in  rebellion  against  the  HidalcHo  (for,  had 
he  been  assisted  by  our  party,  ho  might  have  been  persuaded 
to  undertake  some  proceedings  against  him),  and  trusting 
also  in  the  words  of  Duarte  Tavares,  who  came  quite  de- 
ceived of  the  true  state  of  affairs  by  the  artifices  of  Ro9alcao, 
agreed  with  all  the  Fidalgoes  and  cavaliers  to  help  him,  and 
immediately  made  ready  the  boats  and  galleys,  and  ordered 
Diogo  Fernandez  do  Bdja  to  proceed  with  two  hundred  men 
up  the  river  to  assist  the  operations  madb  by  Rogalcflo ; and 
thus  by  means  of  our  assistance  by  water,  while  Ko9alca.o 
himself  manoeuvred  on  the  land,  they  fell  upon  Pulatecfto, 
and  routed  him ; and  when  Pulatecd^o  saw  that  he  had  lost 
the  day,  ho  fled  to  the  mainland  of  Goa,  where  he  died  of 
poison. 

As  soon  as  Roqalcfto  had  got  possession  of  Benastarim, 
and  fortified  it,  and  provided  it  with  a large  force  of  men, 
and  artillery,  and  munitions  of  war,  after  the  lapse  of  a few 
days,  he  sent  a message  to  Diogo  Mendez,  begging  him 
grAtly  of  his  kindness  to  admit  him  into  the  city,  for  it  waa^ 
the  chief  city  of  the  kingdom  of  the  Hidalcfto,  his  lord. 


APONBO  DALBOQUERQUS. 


103 


which  could  not  be  established  in  any  other  locality.  At 
the  receipt  of  iihis  message  Diogo  ^fon^lc'/  became 
downcast^  and  discovered  the  error  into  which  lie  bad  fallon; 
and  those  who  had  given  their  assent  to  his  policy  were 
discomfited,  and  from  that  time  forward  Koyalcfto  began  to 
make  war  upon  him,  and  kept  the  city  closely  besieged 
during  the  whole  of  that  wiuter,  so  that  ovir  people  under- 
went many  hardships,  hungeV*,  and  misfortunes — far  too 
many  for  me  to  relate  them  here — up  to  the  time  when  the 
great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  returned  from  Maiaca,  which 
was  just  at  the  very  height  of  these  troublcjs,  when  already 
there  was  a good  space  of  the  wall  of  tho  fortress  thrown 
down  to  tho  ground,  which  had  fallen  daring  tho  severe 
wintry  weather. 

When  Jofi.0  Machado  saw  that  some  of  tlni  Portuguese 
went  over  to  Romaics o,  out  of  despair  of  tho  city  being  able 
to  hold  out  any  longer,  he  left  his  wife  and  children,  who 
were  there  with  him,  and  came  over  to  our  side  with  ton  or 
twelve  Christians  who  desired  to  accompany  him,  and  this 
incident  greatly  inspirited  our  men,  because  it  was  in  so 
opportune  a crisis.  This  JojIo  Machado  had  married  a 
Moorish  woman,  who  became  a Christian,  and  by  lior  ho  had 
three  or  four  children,  whom  ho  himself  baptised  secretly. 


CHAPTER  XLII. 

How  tho  great  Afoaso  Dalbocjucrquo,  having  set  fiom  Maiaca, 
steered  for  the  channel  by  wliich  ho  had  ontcnHl  whi  ii  he  caino 
from  India:  and  how  he  was  wroc.ko<i  on  som'.  off  tho 

Coast  of  Cauiatra,  and  miracuUniaiy  saved,  and  tlio  rest  that  took 
place. 

The  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque,  having  s(3t  out  from 
Malaca,«steored  so  as  to  reach  tho  channel  by  which  ho  had 
"entved  when  ho  e-amc  from  India,  and  when  ho  had  passed 

»*» 


VOL.  m. 


194 


COMMENTARIES  OF 


over  the  shoals  of  Capacia  ho  ordered  the  paptains  of  the 
ship  Enxohregas  and  the  junk  to  keep  close  together, 
because  they  sailed  well  in  company,  lest  the  Javanese,  who 
were  on  board  tlie  junk,  should  plan  any  treason  against 
them,  while  he  l^imsolf  and  Pero  Dalpoem  sailed  as  convoy 
to  each  other ; and  thus  proceeding  with  their  voyage,  when 
they  had  gone  as  far  forward  as  the  Powder  Island,^  the 
Pilots  of  Afonso  I)alboquer(5ue’a  ship  not  being  on  their 
guard  concerning  certain  shallows  which  were  situated  off 
that  part  of  the  coast  of  Qainatra,  just  opposite  to  the  king- 
dom of  Darn ran  the  ship  Flor  (Ie4a-Mar  ashore  upon 
them  in  the  night,  and  the  vessel,  being  by,  this  time  very 
old,  broke  np  into  two  parts  directly  she  struck.^ 

Pero  Dalpoem,  who  was  on  the  outer  hand,  let  go  his 


' Sec  p.  02,  note  2, 

* Dani  is  marked  neither  by  Berthclot  in  Podro  Barretto  de  Rosend^’s 
MS.,  to  which  I have  alrciifly  so  frequently  referred,  nor  by  Keith  John- 
ston in  his  Royal  Atlas.  The  Fortolano  of  Fernao  Vaz  Dourado,  de- 
scribed in  the  Intro<hiction  of  vol.  ii,  marks  Daru  on  the  western  side 
of  Sumatra. 

ITie  imrallel  account  of  the  shipwreck  of  Afonso  Dalboquerque 
from  Correa,  p.  269,  is  very  graphic “Assy  vindo,  Ihe  deu  hum  tempo 
trauessao  tao  forte  que  nom  ])Ade  al  fazer  Benao  sorgir,  que  foy  com  huma 
ancora  grande  e liuma  amarra  dc  rdtas,  que  bSo  cantOs  delgadaa  moci9a8,  que 
trdeem,  e fazera  d'cllas  fortes  arnarras.  E tambem  sorgio  Pero  d’Alpoym, 
que  era  A sua  vista,  que  o.s  outros  nom  pareciao,  que  correrao  Auante, 
porque  er5o  mats  metidew  no  mar;  mas  (jarrando  a noite,  0 'tempo  e o 
mar  se  tanto  aleuantou  que  foy  tromenta  desfeita,  em  tal  maneyru 
que  conueo  ao  Covoraador  cortar  todos  os  mastos,  porque  a nao  trabal- 
haua  limy  to  com  o mar  por  proa ; e niandou  que  todo  ficasse  amarrado 
A nao,  e do  todo  fizessem  jangada,  porque  a nao  so  hia  ao  furido  com  a 
bomba  quo  norn  jiodiao  veneer.  Polo  que  toda  a gente  se  meteo  no 
trabalho  da  jangada  fortt*raente,  em  que  alguns  morrerao,  porque  o mar 
era  grande,  verido  que  nom  tinhao  outra  salaa^ao.  E porque  a jangada 
Be  desfazia  na  nao,  entao  a mandou  o Gouernador  largar  por  popa,  e 
liomens  q\ie  defendifio  *08  negros  que  se  hiiio  meter  n’ella  com  trouxas, 
que  seus  senhorcs  mandauSo  meter.  0 Gouernador  mandou  meter  os 
doeutos  no  liatel  por  pope  da  jangada,  c fallou  a toda  a gente  que  ello 
em  ciroulas  e jaqueta  se  auia  de  meter  na  jangadaf^que  por 'tanto  sou.- 
bessem  e.erto  que  d’outra  maneyira  ninguem  n^ella  nom  auia  d’entrar; 


AFONSO  DAL110QIIKR<^»UK. 


195 


anchor  immediately  that  he  heard  the  cries  of  the  cr(w  and 
understood  thatHhe  ship  was  lost,  and  remained  wliero  ho 
was  all  the  night  long  in  a fierce  gn!o  at  the  mercy  of  tho 
cablo ; and  when  morning  broke  the  boats  of  the  ships 
Trindarle  and  having  been  lost  (being  staved 

in  on  board  tho  ships  on  account  of  tho  heavy  seas  breaking 
over  the  decks),  Afonso  Dalboqiiorqne  gave  the  order  that 
a raft  should  be  prepared  with  boards  placed  upon  some 
timbers,  and  ho  got  upon  it,  clad  in  a grey  jacket,  and 
lashed  to  tho  raft  with  a rope,  lost  the  waves  should  sweep 

j)cdiiido  a Dcos  raiaerioordia  das  alni:is,  ponjiu;  das  vidas  ninguein  fizessc 
conta. 

“ Kiitito  0 Oouflrnadcr  per  huuui  eorda  atada  pela  cinta  se  dcitou  no 
esquil'e,  e coin  elle  os  homoiis  quo  eoulx'ivio,  <5  se  foy  a janpailn  em  (pic  so 
iiicteo,  e 0 es(]ulfe  tornuu  anao  taulas  vozok  ate  (pie  iioin  fi'jou  iieiihuin 
homeui  portuguez;  e o Ooueruador  nom  couseotio  na  jaugada  iicuiuini 
negro,  Tiein  negi*a,  quo  todos  deiUai  ao  mar,  c ti<‘auao  j>egadoi^  a jaiigada. 
Estaudo  ii’csto  trabalho,  a nao  se  quei.ron  polo  cr'iiiies  em  dons  pt'ihi^^us, 
e se  foy  ao  fundo  ; ein  que  se  p(ird(!o  a uidr  ib^uoza  d’ouro  c pidiaria  qu«^ 
nunqun  se  perd(‘o  cm  nonhmna  patki  da  India,  ncm  nunqua  perdera.  K 
porque  a uiadcira  da  nao  vinlia  fa/.or  lual  ua  jangada,  sc  aleuanUirrio,  u 
’agon  03  foy  leuaiido  pera  terra,  ondc  tornarao  a sorgir  com  Imnia  loicora 
qne  leuana  o batel,  e assy  estiuer:.*)  com  as  alniivs  nas  hoquaa  pedindo 
misencordia  a bcos,  at^  que  ainanhcia-o,  (pieo  vonto  e mar  era  menos. 

‘‘Qiiaiido  Amanheceo,  que  da  nao  di‘  Eero  d’Alpoym  nom  virao  a rnio  do 
Goucniador,  c virio  a madcira  polo  mar,  a dcrao  jku'  perdida,  a gento 
morta,  on  (pic  sc  f6ra  a terra.  Eolo  «pU5  <loii  a vela,  c hiiidu  jn  ra  (erra 
ouverflo  vlhia  da  jangada,  ]n)vqiio  alcuaulaii^o  puno3  nas  jxMitas  duH 
lau^as  (pio  inctcriVO  na  jangada  pern  defeusao  dos  negros ; cm  que  a nao 
foy  sorgir  perto  da  jangada,  <jU(’  PhIijs  bradauioj  ‘Souiior  D'^os,  miscii- 
cordia!’  As  que  logo  Pero  ilWlpoym  mandou  o bated,  «‘m  qim  vc  meteo 
0 Gouernador  com  a gente  quo  pixli!,  c tambeiu  o bati  l,  com  a gont-c  quo 
dcBcarrcgou  na  nao  so  toriiou  a jangada  ato  quo  a dohcarivgou  ; <■  todavia 
ou»rc  homens  (|';o  saluario  may  to  ouro  dorrador  .b'  sy.  I)'*uj  Joao  do 
Ivitna  poH  a sua  naf>  ao  p?ino,  c abrio  tauta  ugoa  quo  ('orroo  ao  sora  do 
mar,  o i>6dc  fazir  caminho  porque  era  uuiyto  afastado  da  terra,  que 
nada  soubo  da  perdicAo  da  nao  do  Gouermulor,  c oomo  o tempo  aboiian- 
eou,  audou  com  pouqa  nola  agiiardaiulo  polo  (b)ucrnador,  (iim  bem  sabia 
qiic  flcaua  atei.-,  e as^^y  andundo,  daby  a dez  dias  o Gouernador  foy  tor 
tiom  die,  c se  guirfo  seu  caminho  i^rra  Clochym,  ondc  d>--.garAo  com 
grande  trabalbo  dc  bomba,  meo:^  perdidos.  jd  cm  jancivo  de  1512,’' 


196 


OOMMKNTABI18  Of 


him  off,  and  two  mariners  with  him,  who  with  oars  impro- 
vised out  of  some  pieces  of  boards  rowed  the  raft : and  so 
in  this  plight,  and  by  these  means,  and  also  by  help  of  ropes 
which  by  Pero  Dalpoera^s  orders  were  thrown  out,  tied 
to  buckets,  with  infinite  difficulty  he  reached  the  ship 
Trindade, 

The  men  who  were  left  in  the  wreck  of  the  Flor-de4a- 
Mar,  seeing  themselves  already  come  to  the  last  day  of 
thoir  lives,  began  with  loud  cries  and  complaints  to  shout 
after  Afonso  Dalboquorque,  who  was  making  way  on  the 
raft,  and  he,  touched  with  profound  pity  at  the  sight  of 
them  in  this  sad  state  of  misery,  told  them  not  to  be 
alarmed,  but  to  put  all  their  trust  in  our  Lord,  for  he  would 
promise  them  that  ho  would  not  desert  them,  even  if  ho 
ventured  to  lose  his  owu  life  and  the  other  ship  and  all  her 
company  in  saving  th(3m ; and  ho  desired  them,  in  the 
meantime,  to  construct  another  raft,  for  ho  would  come 
back  without  delay  for  them. 

While  the  shipwrecked  men  wore  making  their  raft,  the 
junk,  which  was  commanded  by  Simfto  Martinz,  came  up  on 
her  land -tack,  very  close  to  the  spot  where  the  remains  of 
the  Floi'-de-la~Mar  were  with  our  men  clustering  upon  them, 
and  those  on  board  the  junk  clearly  perceived  the  plight  in 
which  they  were,  and  then  she  tacked  again  and  stood  out 
to  sea,  and  they  never  saw  her  again.  The  reaabn  of  this 
was,  that  the  Javanese,  who  were  on  board  this  junk,  on 
account  of  the  careless  conduct  of  Jorge  Nunez  de  Li^ 
(although  Afonso  Dalboquerque  had  especially  c&utioned 
him  in  this  respect,  and  also  because  of  the  severe  illness  of 
SimSo  Martinz),  rose  up  in  mutiny,  ^d  killed  all  the  Portu- 
guese on  board,  without  any  escaping,  except  four  mariners 
who  took  advantage  of  the  confusion  of  the  outbreak  and 
got  into  an  almadta,  and  made  theif  way  to  Pac4,  where  the 
Governor,  who  had  risen  up  in  rebellion  anditaken  posseasipig 
of  the  Irfngdom,  received  them  with  hospitality  and  shewed 


AFOKSO  DAiBOQtJKEQUE. 


iy/ 

thorn  great  honour^  and  sent  tkem  forward  on  the  way  to 
India  in  a ship  which  had  put  in  there  coming  from 
Malaca  bound  for  Ohoraraandel;  and  just  as  they  were 
about  to  set  out,  the  junk’s  barge  came  in  crowded  with 
Javanese,  and  they  declared  that  tho  junk  was  lost. 

As  soon  as  Afonso  Dalboquerque  had  reached  the  ship 
Tmi^adCf  after  a great  deal  of  difficulty — our  Lord  having 
been  pleased  to  save  him  miraculously,  becauao,  by  all 
human  reason,  on  account  of  tho  sea  running  so  high,  it 
was  impossible  for  him  to  have  been  saved,* — ho  remembered 
the  promise  which  ho  had  given  to  those  who  were  left 
behind  on'  the  wreck,  and  lost  no  time  in  commanding  Poro 
Dalpoem  to  set  sail  so  as  to  got  up  to  them  and  take  them 
on  board.  But  the  crew  of  the  ship  Trindade,  thinking 
more  of  themselves  than  of  the  danger  and  trouble  in  which 
their  companions  were,  made  many  objections  and  requests 
that  he  would  not  order  the  ship  close  iu  to  the  shore,  for 
it  was  shelving  rock,  and  the  wind  was  very  high,  and  they 
also  would  be  wrecked. 

Afonso  Dalboquerque,  considering  that  h(^  could  not  with 
any  sense  of  duty  fail  to  save  those  persons  vho  had  accom- 
panied him  in  his  labours,  would  not  listen  to  these  mur- 
murings,  but  rather  reprehended  the  crew  for  the  little 
remembrance  which  they  had  of  the  frequent  occasions  when 
they  ha*d  been  protected  by  these  very  sliipwreckcd  com- 
panions in  the  reverses  which  they  had  expenenced  in  tho 
Malaca  enterprise,  and  determined,  at  all  hazards,  to  save 
them ; ''and  creeping  in  shore  under  sail  to  roach  the  raft 
which  tho  wrecked  crew  had  put  together'  out  of  the  mast  and 
tho  yard,  with  all  the  company  of  tho  sliij’  upon  it,  he  saw  that 
it  was  not  riding  to  its  cable  (some  of  the  mariners  declared 
afterwards  that  the  cable  had  been  cut  but  they  did  not  know 
who  it  was  that  did  it) ; and  because  both  wind  and  sea  were 
^ontrar)^  for  raft  to  get  towards  the  ship,  but  drove  her 
towards  the  shore,  without  those  who  were  on  her  being  able 


198 


COMMKNTARIES  OF 


to  make  my  use  of  the  pieces  of  oars  with  which  they  tned 
to  i'owy  in  order  to  accomplish  that  which  ho  had  promised 
thorn  he  would  do,  although  he  had  no  longer  any  hopes  of 
being  able  to  save  them,  he  ordered  the  crew  to  set  all  the 
sail  they  possibly  could  in  order  to  catch  up  the  junk  before 
she  struck  on  the  coast,  and  to  get  ready  two  anchors  so  as 
to  cast  them  if  need  should  arise;  and  he  ordered  the  pilots 
to  keep  on  sounding  the  bottom  with  thoir  lead  in  their 
hands,  and,  as  the  turn  of  the  tide  was  just  beginning, 
and  the  sen  filling,  in  a very  short  space  of  time  they 
reached  the  raft,  and  cast  the  anchors  immediately  in  three 
and  a half  fathoms,  which  was  the  depth  jvhich  the  ship 
required  with  proper  precautions;  and  with  ropes  tied  to 
buckets  and  empty  barrels  which  they  let  out  of  the  ship, 
they  took  the  junk  with  great  trouble,  and  when  they  had 
drawn  the  people  up  on  board,  they  remained  where  they 
were  all  that  night  with  a groat  gale  blowing  behind  them, 
trusting  in  the  Tiord’s  mercy,  which  did  not  fail  them;  for, 
just  before  dawn  of  day,  there  sprung  up  a little  land  breeze 
which  enabled  them  to  draw  off  and  proceed  with  their 
voyage. 


CHAn^ER  XLIIL  ' “ 

Of  what  was  Iwt  in  the  aliip  Flor  de-la-Mar:  and  howth^  Great  Afonso 
Oalboquerque,  after  liaving  collected  his  people  together  on  the 
ship  TriiultiiU;,  [JFOceeded  on  hw  route  to  CeiUo:  and  of  what  took 
place  on  tlie  voyage  until  they  arrived  at  Cochim. 

In  this  ship,  Floi'-de-la-Mar,  aqd  in  the  junk  which 
mutinied  against  us,  there  were  lost  the  richest  spoils  that 
ever  wero  seen  siuQe  India  had  been  discovered  until  that 
moment;  and  besides  this,  many  wpraen  who  were  greatly 
skilled  workers  in  embroidery,  and  many  young  girls  anjJ 
youths  of  noble  family  from  all  those  countries  which  extend 


▲F0K60  OALBOQUSBQUE. 


109 


from  the  Cape  of  Oomorim  to  the  eastward,'  whom  Afonso 
Dalboquerquc)  was  carrying  to  the  Queen  D.  Maria.  They 
lost  the  castles  of  woodwork,  ornamented  with  brocades, 
which  the  King  of  Malaca  used  to  carry  upon  liis  elephants, 
and  very  rich  palanquins^  for  hia  personal  use,  all  plated 
with  gold,  a marvellous  thing  to  behold,  and  great  store  of 
jewellery  of  good  and  precious  stones  which  ho  was  carrying 
with  him  in  order  to  send  it  as  a present  to  tho  King  D. 
Manuel.  And  they  lost  a table  with  its  feet  all  overlaid 
with  plates  of  gold,  w^ich  Milrrhao  presented  to  Afonso 
Dalboqucrquo  for  the  king,  when  the  lands  of  Goa  wore 
delivered  up  tp  him.  For  when  he  arrived  at.  Oochirn,  with 
the  intention  of  leaving  this  table  with  the  Factor,  who 
could  forward  it  to  Portugal,  so  great  was  tho  hurry  to 
embark,  in  order  to  save  the  monsoon  which  was  getting 
well  forward  iu  its  season,  that  it  was  forgotten,  and  then 
he  took  it  with  him.  And  all  our  mm  also  lost  a great 
quantity  of  their  own  things.  And  this  so  extensively, 
that  of  all  that  was  on  board,  both  in  the  ship  and  the 
junk,  nothing  was  saved  except  the  sword  and  crown  of 
gold,  and  the  ruby  ring  which  the  king  of  Siuo  soul  to  the 
King  D..  Manuel;  but  that  which  Afonso  Dalboipierque 
grieved" for  most  of  all  in  this  loss  was  the  bracelet''^  which 
had  been  found  upon  Naodabegea,  for  he  brougbt  it  with 
great  &timation  in  order  to  send  it  to  tho  king,  because 
the  efficacy  of  it  was  so  very  admirable.  So  also  lie  tbit  very 
much  the  loss  of  the  lions,  wliich  ho  brought  becauso  they 
were'found  on  certain  ancient  sepulchres  of  the  kings  of 
Malaca,  and  he  took  thorn  with  tho  intention  of  placing 
them  on  his  own  tomb  in  Goa  as  a memorial  ot  the 
achievement  of  taking  Malaca;  and,  of  all  the  spoils  which 
were  then  taken,  he  reserwd  only  these  two  things  (the 

' Cf.  Chapter  xxxix,  Aqiieni  do  Ganges,  a quo  os  Portugaeses  oliamab 
do  Cabddo  Comorim  jKra  di  tHro.  ^ “ Audvres. 

% See  p.  62. 


200 


COMMENTARIES  Of 


bracelet  and  lions)  for  himself,  for  os  they  were  of  iron  they 
werS  [not]  of  great  valuo.^ 

In  this  return  journey  of  crossing  over  the  Indian  Ocean 
to  Ceilao  they  would  have  perished  for  want  of  water  and 
supplies  if  Our  Lord  had  not  succoured  thorn  by  moans  of 
*two  large  Moorish  ships  which  they  overtook  on  the  voyage, 
bound  from  (j'amatra  and  laden  with  pepper  and  silk,  sandal 
wood  and  wood  aloes.^  For  as  soon  ns  Afonso  Dalboquerque 

‘ Que  por  rfe  Jnro  eram  ynuito  pent  cutimar ; I am  inclined  to 
consider  luio  has  dropped  out  before  c;vo»  in  this  passage,  in  both 
editiona. 

• Ltnholoes ; lifjnnm  nloeJt.  Cf.  the  note  on  AnAonoe,  page  169. 
As  very  litthi  apj  eani  to  be  now  known  of  the  v ood-aioes^  or  Calamba, 
tho  following  note  will  bo  read  with  intirest:  ~ Culaiuba,  Oalainba,  ou 
Calanibnco;  na  1 I)(‘ca<la,  f.  17,  col.  Jofio  do  Harros  Ihe  chama  Lenholo^^ 
Roinh.  (liz,  ‘ pa.ssado  ^sto  Reyno  Cand-oja,  entra  outro  lleyno  Chaniado 
Campfi,,  iiiia  nKnitanhas  do  qiud  mv'c  o verdadeiro  Lcuholot^  a que  oe 
Mouros  daquellas  ptaHes  cliainAo  ^ 'al(inil>vc\  Com  J.  de  Barroe  se  con- 
fonau  A AcaJcuii.i  Frunoesa  no  Dierhm.  das  .Irre.f,  p.  90,  donde  diz  qnc 
09  boticarius  clumro'  ?u>  ('alainba  Liynum  Aloes.  Segundo  as  noticias 
que  me  denio  Ant()nio  de  Mello  o Caistio,  Viso  Key  (pie  foy  da  India,  e 
Manuel  Godinhr  do  Sd,  Caj)itao  da  Nao  Milagres,  que  assistio  em  Macdo 
32  annos,  ( 'al'i.tha  na  lingv»a  tUi  terra,  (pie  o prcaluz,  val  o niesrooquc 
docucQ  da  nrvt  re.  A rcziio  dcsta  nomo  ho,  quo  na  Cochinchina,  e nos 
Keynori  do  t bainpil,  e Cainboja,  ha  grandes  dovezas  do  arvores,  rnuy 
i^p(?aajf.  0 eninaranhadHS,  c incteudose  entre  ellas  alguns  GcuKoh  prac- 
ticoB,  eueontrrio  huniu  corta  caf.ta  do  arvores,  e is  Vir/.(38  vcm  alguma 
dellas,  que  so  vay  murcliando,  e dizetn  logo  conmigo,  ‘ esta  arvoro  pareeo 
que  tein  doen<,'a';  poem  na  devesa  suas  balizas,  e vindo  da  hi  K alguna 
dias  por  ellas,  nch^o  a tal  arvore  iniircha  ttxla,  e cr)rtando*a  bein  rente 
do  ch3o,  acbilo  no  amago  da  corUdura  do  tronco,  hum  conio  nd,  main 
preto,  que,  k maneira  dc  cancio,  chupou,  e chan  on  a si  o fiucco  e olco* 
da  tal  arvore,  que  unido  t junto  nelle,  teni  o Buave  e preoioso  cheiro,  qne 
exqu^imentanios,  c quanto  uiaia  vigor  havia  na  arvore,  xnais  oleoBO  e 
prccii»ao  he  o Calambuco ; e se  a arvoro  iinha  pouoo  alonto,  naq  ha  nella 
o Calambuco  prezado,  senio  secco,  e 3cm  oleo,  e val  mny  p>ouco......o 

ditt*»  Capitdo  Manoel  Godinho  jirovava  o CalatnbA  desta  inaucira. 
U'iruva  com  huma  fu(}uinha  hums  migalhitiha  destc  pao,  e a metia  na 
b/jon,  e andava  ex>m  ella  (^ntro  os  dentes,  6 fio  ella  Hodbe-ajuntava,  e 
amaflsava  entre  os  dentes  como  cera,  tinha-a  por  boa ; o esse  dm  andava 
ordinariHiTieuU;  com  (lores  de  cabw,'a,4»<jrque  ho  cousa  uiuito  (piente,  o do 
dairo  rnuito  jx'iietranto ; e desta  es|)ecie  tom  muito  pouca  a KufO^, 


AFONSO  DALBOQUERQUE. 


201 


caught  sigU  of  them  he  gave  orders  to  cluse  them,  and 
took  them,  aild  out  of  their  stores  he  furnished  himself 
with  provisions  and  water,  which  enabled  him  to  make  his 
way  to  Ceilao.  And  because  the  Moors  declared  Aat  the 
ships  came  from  Chaul  and  from  Dabub'  he  ordered 
Dandrade  with  a prize  party,  and  Diuis  Fernandez  to 
main  on  board  of  them  until  he  could  learn  the  truth  of  it. 

The  Moors  who  formed  the  crew  of  the  ship  of  Chaul,  to 
which  Similo  Dandrado  was  appointed,  found  out  that  he 
did  not  know  his  latitude,  nor  yet  tho  course  they  were 
sailing  on,  so  they  steered  their  course  for  tho  Maldive 
Islands,^  and "snccee clod  in  reaching  Caudal uz^  (which  ia  tho 


poniuo  tern  graude  prc(;oein  .J'apiio,  dondc^  4110  val  luais  de  outenta 
mi)  ri'is  o arrateb  Com  oato  prcciosO  aroma  perfiimao  os  Japoons  as 
cazafi  c os  vestidos.  Csam  (Udle  os  (.’liiiis  nos  accidcutee  do  Paralysia,  e 
na  falta  dos  espiritoa  vitaes.  Foito  cm  p<3,  c toiuadu  cia  viaho,  ou  era 
caldo,  corrobora  0 estoinago,  vedu  os  vomitos,  e sara  as  dysetitcriaa. 
Dizem  qiie  a arvore,  (juo  0 proiluz,  he  algum  tanto  mayor  quo  oliveira, 
com  que  ttunbem  se  parcce.  As  vezes  se  tuthao  Immjvs  pequouas  por^oeus 
dcste  pao  «as  inargeiis  do  Cauges,  jx)r  isso  lhe-c!iamao  algims  Lignum 
Pnradm, 

‘‘  F^crcvein  algnuis  modernos  quo  tainbcin  se  aci\u  CalarabA,  ou  Calam- 

buco,  mis  ilhaa  Maldivaa oa  Fadros  Mi^sioi\arios  da  Coinpaiihia  no 

scu  livro  iSthnnhurias  imdcioii  du  Codttnrhfia  vi'.»/ht»ao  que  Ita  admente  iias 
terras  did  Key  da  Coobiuoliina,  o ipuii  conjo  Jaz  to<io3  os  gastos  no  deseo- 
briracuto,  tem  tcxlo  0 proveiio  da  oouquista.  l';'v\ra  maito  os  Japoena 
dtdle  panfperfuim^,”  iiW.-  BluUau, 

‘ Navigators  in  gentTul  are  not  aware,  more  pai  tioularly  those  coming 
from  Europe,  that  the  w hole  group  of  the  Maldiva  kiands  are  inhabited 
by  a civilised  race  of  people,  who  carry  ou  a conyivl-  rable  trade  wdth  liulia, 
more  paHicularly  Bengal,  Ceylon,  and  tlie  Malabar  coast,  a^  also  to  the 
lied  Sea,  and  arc  ex^M  i-t  6;iilor8.  Ti.cy  are  an  inoffensive,  timid  people, 
and  there  appears  far  less  crime  among  them  liiau  w ith  more  ix)!ished 
nations;  murder  is  not  kuo^n  among  them, nor  i«  theft  or  diunkenncss ; 
being  strict  Mussulmans,  they  are  b rbidden  the  use  of  spirituous  liquors, 
which  could  be  easier  made  from  the  fcrmoutojjl  juice  of  the  coco-nut 

* • 
Candaluz;  ibis  island  is  niark«j<l  {m  ConMu.<)  in  the  map  from  tho 
^ff'ortolano'of  Feriiao  Va>:  Douvado,  4 fac.-iuule  of  which  is  given  in 
VoJi  iil,  facing  cliaptcr  i. 


202 


COMMENTAKlEfi  OP 


principal  ielari  in  this  group),  and  tlioro  al  rs  fled 

awjiy  from  aim;  and  from  some  Moors  of  Oauanor  whom 
Simfto  Dfodrade  found  in  that  place,  he  learned  that  Mafa- 
mede  ^la^ari,^  a morohant  of  Cairo  was  there,  and  ho  was 
one  ’'ho  always  maintained  the  policy  of  tho  Rumes  with 
Uo  ^amorim,  and  tried  hard  to  bring  them  over  to  India; 
but  when  Afonso  Ualboquerque  was  in  Malaca,  out  of  fear 

tre^e,  wiiich  they  luvvc  Ui  alSuudanco.  Tho  men,  in  appeannee,  are  of  a 
darl:  cop]K'iM  ok>ur,  rathor  sliort,  and  in  person  not  unlike  the  natives  of 
Ceylon  and  the  ^lalahar  coi\st,  but  their  language  k totally  different; 
their  women  arc  not  pretty,  and  are  extremely  alarmed  at  the  sight  of 
Btrangers.  The  group  conBists  of  a range  of  iunumevable  low  islands 
and  rocks,  extending  nearly  on  a meridian  line  (iu<  shewu  in  tl)e  map  re- 
ferred to  above)  frora  latitude  7 deg.  min.  N.  to  iHtiludii  0 deg.  42 
min.  8. ; the  larger  islands  abound  with  cocomut  innm,  and  arc*  generally 
inhabitei^l,  but  many  of  the  others  arc  only  sandbanks  or  barren  rocks. 
The  greatest  breadth  of  the  range  is  about  twenty  leagues,  and  the 
islands  are  formed  in  large  groups  or  clusters,  sometiuu^s  rlouble,  which 
are  called  by  tho  natives  AtolU  or  Atollons,  These  Atolls  apin^ar  to  bo 
the  summits  of  submarine  coral  mountains,  rising  very  abruptly  to  the 
surface  of  the  sea,  and  having  an  almiM  UDfuthomable  depth  of  water 
outside  of  them,  but  enclosing  within  the  crater- like  ridges  which  bound 
them,  banks  of  Boun<Ung8  of  various  depthg,  from  ton  to  thirty  or  forty 
fathoms.  The  islands  of  each  Atoll  generally  lie  in  a continued  chain 
on  the  barrier  ridge  which  bounds  it,  although  tliero  are  many  on  the  in- 
terior banks,  which,  in  addition  the  islands,  are  gtmerally  studded 
with  rocky  patches  and  banks.  There  arc  iunct(x;n  Atolls,  with  several 
detached  islands  or  rocks  in  the  channels  that  separate  thorn.  Although 
these  islands  have  long  been  thought  to  present  an  iinpenctratile  barrier 
of  four  hundred  and  seventy  meridional  miles  to  shifts  bound  to  Ceylon, 
or  the  southern  parts  of  India,  and  have  conaei[Ucntly  beeif  dreaded  and 
avoided  by  modem  navigators,  yet  the  early  traders  from  Europe  to 
India  appear  to  have  been  much  lietter  aerfuainted  with  them  than  wo 
until  lately  were,  and,  like  Afonso  DalbcKpierque  on  his  return  voyage 
from  Malaca  to  Cochim,  often  passed  through  some  of  the  wider  and 
# safer  channels  which  separate  the  AtoUfl,  without  apprehension  of  dan^r. 
Horsburgh,  from  whose  work  the  abpve  notes  are  derived,  docs  not  men- 
tion any  island  with  amame  &t  all  resembling  Candiduz,  except  Kara- 
doouloo,  the  northern  island  on  tho  wcsteQ>  side  of  the  Collomandoa 
Atoll  ; whereas  the  position  of  Oandahiz  in  Fernao  Vaz  Dour|do’s  chart 
seems  to  point  to  the  island  now  ealiod  Cardiva  in  the  Cariliva  Cliaun^ 
of  this  group.  » 8ee  p.  8^! 


AFONSO  DALBOqOERQUS* 


203 


which  he  hq^d,  lest,  if  we  gained  the  victory,  the  ^amorim 
would  deliver  him  up  to  Afonso  Dalboquerque  (for  this  bad 
long  been  a subject  of  secret  negotiations,  but  the  Qamorim 
had  always  temporised  with  it  and  screened  him  with  lies), 
and  dreading  lest  some  day  the  Qamorim  should  tell  the 
truth  about  him,  he  set  out  from  Calicut  with  three  ships 
laden  with  spicerios,  and,  having  his  wife  and  children  and 
all  his  property  on  board;  ahd,  when  he  had  progressed  on 
his  voyage  as  far  as  Qacotora,  sailing  close  in  shore  between 
the  capo  of  Guardafum'  and  Magadaxo,^  he  encountered  so 
fierce  a storm  that  he  was  driven  ashore,  and  in  that  tem- 
pest lost  two^qf  his  ships,  and  he  himself  in  the  one  he  sailed 
in  with  his  wife  and  children  ran  to  the  Maidive  Islands  and 
managed  to  get  to  Candaluz,  and  there  he  capsized  his 
ship,  but  saved  some  of  his  spicories  and  bought  a candtira, 
which  is  a kind  of  small  vessel  with  which  they  navigate 
those  islands. 

And  when  the  proper  season  of  the  year  came  on,  ho 
sailed  away  with  the  remainder  of  his  spiccries  that  he  had 
managed  to  save,  taking  SimS,o  Rangel,  whom  he  had 
bought,  and  made  his  way  to  Calayate,^  whoro  the  candura 
was  lost,  and  from  that  port  lie  sailed  away  in  a ship  bound 
for  Ormuz,  and  got  to  Aden. 

In  this  storm  many  ships  were  lost  which  had  set  out  for 
the  Stthits  [of  tho  Red  Sea]  while  Afonso  Dalboquerque 
was  at  Malaca ; and,  on  account  of  this  great  destruction 
which  the  Moors  of  Calicut  suffered  in  their  ships  because 
they  Were  largo  ships,  and  every  one  that  was  lost  caused 
them  to  suffer  heavily — for  they  dared  not  venture  to  sea 
except  in  the  winter  for  fear  of  our  fleets, — from  that  tim^ 
forward  they  built  small  vessels,  and,  rowing  them  about, 
navigated  all  the  Straits  of  tbo  Red  Sea. 

When  Afonso  Dalbpquerque,  after  his  arrival  at  Cochim,^ 

i) 

^ Seetaap,  vol.  i,  p.  80.  ^ See  chapter  vii,  and  vol,  i,  p.  45. 

3«Sce  vol.  i,  p.  62. 


204 


COMMXNTABIES  Of 


learned  that  Mafamede  Ma^ari  had  visited  the  islands^  he 
felt^his  unfortunate  shipwreck  much  more,  for  he  had 
come  with  the  determination  of  sweeping  through  them  with 
his  squadron  and  keeping  on  the  course  used  by  the  Moord 
in  their  navigation  of  those  islands ; and  so  it  might  have 
turned  out  that  he  would  have  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the 
Portuguese  with  all  his  property,  and  this  was  what  Afonso 
Dalboquerque  was  very  desirous  of  happening. 

Simfto  Rangel  was  a very  honourable  man,  a servant  of 
the  King  D,  Manuel,  and  Afonso  Dalboquerque  had  made 
use  of  his  assistance  in  many  matters  because  he  was  a mau 
who  knew  how  to  perform  everything  very  well ; and  when 
he  was  atCochim — A^fonso  Dalboquerque  being  at  Malaca — 
he  and  some  of  the  others  began  to  disagree  about  some 
proceedings  done  hy  Louron^o  Moreno,  Antonio  Real,  and 
Diogo  Pereira  to  the  disservice  of  the  king,  so  they  sent 
him  in  a caiur  to  Goa,  and  on  the  voyage  the  paraos  of 
Calicut  took  him  captive.  And  this  Mafamede  MaQari 
bought  him  and  took  him  with  him,  whereat  Afonso  Dal- 
boquerquo  was  very  much  annoyed  and  desired  to  punish 
Lourengo  Moreno,  who  was  the  Factor;  but,  as  all  were  to 
blame,  he  left  the  matter  alone,  and  wrote  to  the  King  Dom 
Manuel  of  all  that  they  had  done  wliilo  ho  was  in  Malaca, 
and  of  the  carelessness  they  had  been  guility  of  in  failing  to 
victual  Goa  when  it  was  besieged. 


CHAPTER  XLIV. 

the  great  Afonso  Dalboqaorqao  reached  Oochim ; and  of  the  nows 
which  they  gave  him  concerning  Goa,  and  of  the  coining  of  the 
Rames,  and  of  the  flyet  which  ai^ved  from  Portugal 

, As  soon  as  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  reached  Cochim, 
inasmuch  as  up  to  that  moment  there  was  no  newsT  of  him 
nor  of  the  events  which  had  taken  place  at  Malaca,  there 


AFONSO  DALBOQUERQUE. 


205 


was  a great  excitement  and  all  were  filled  with  pleasure,  for 
at  his  arrival  th<j  Moors  of  India  abated  in  some  degree  tho 
excitement  they  had  fallen  into  at  the  news  of  the  coming  of 
the  Ruraes.  And  Louren^o  Moreno,  Antonio  Real,  and 
Diogo  Pereira  became  very  much  ashamed  of  themselves 
for  having  written  to  the  King  D.  Manud,  and  set  on  foot 
thronghout  India  a rumour  that  Afonso  Dalboquerque  was 
. lost,  and  all  his  fleet  with  him  ; although  this  great  captain 
was  so  much  dreaded  by  tho  Moors,  and  such  authority  was 
attached  to  his  person  among  them,  that  by  means  of  his 
presence  only,  frustrated  as  he  was,  wrecked,  and  clad  in 
tho  same  greyj'acket  which  he  was  saved  in  at  the  wi’ock, 
the  mere  knowledge  that  he  had  returned  to  India,  made  all 
the  kings  of  that  land  disband  and  withdraw  from  that  con- 
spiracy which  they  had  set  on  foot  against  the  Portuguese, 
And  Afonso  Dalboquerque  disembarked  on  the  very  day 
of  his  arrival,  and  from  the  dock  whero  the  captain  stood 
with  all  his  company  ready  to  receive  him,  they  took  him 
up  under  a brocaded  canopy  to  the  church,  the  vicar  of  it 
standing  at  the  door  with  the  reliques  awaiting  his  coming ; 
and,  after  prayer  made,  and  many  thanks  given  to  our  Lord 
for  having  delivered  him  from  tho  perils  which  ho  had 
passed  through,  he  went  to  the  fortress  accompanied  by 
every  one,  and  after  giving  them  a great  reception  he  took 
liis  leave  of  them  at  tho  gate,  and  remained  behind  alone 
with  the  captain  and  tho  king^s  oflScors.  And  after  having 
given  them  an  account  of  the  doings  at  Malaca,  and  of  what 
had  taken  place  during  his  voyage,  he  asked  them  concern- 
ing the  king's  property  and  the  ships  which  had  sailed  away 
laden  with  Oriental  produce  to  Portugal  that  year.  For, 
although  military  affairs  occupied  much  of  his  thoughts,  yel^ 
he  never  wanted  time  to  look  after  the^iroperty  of  the  king. 
And  when  ho  inquired  after  tho  state  of  affairs  at  Goa — for 
this  was  thb  matter  which  occupied  the  chief  position  in  his* 
thoughts  oven  while  he  was  at  Malaca — they  related  to  him 


206 


COMVBNTABIBS  09 


how  during  all  that  winter  the  city  had  been  besieged  by 
thr^  captains  of  the  Hidalcao  with  a large  army,  and  they 
showed  him  all  the  hardships  which  the  siege  bad  brought 
upon  our  people,  both  by  war  and  by  famine,  and  that  they 
were  quite  undone  from  the  fact  that  a considerable  length 
of  their  wall  had  talleu  from  the  severity  of  the  winter;  they 
told  him,  too,  that  the  Captain  and  Manuel  da  Cunha  were 
deed. 

Afonso  Dalboquerque  felt  these  deaths  very  keenly;  that 
of  Rodrigo  Rabelo  because  he  was  a brave  cavalier,  and  that 
of  Manuel  da  Cunha  Ibecanse  he  was  not  on  very  good  terras 
of  intercourse  with  his  father  Tristfi.o  da  Cunha  on  account  of 
the  disagreements  which  arose  between  them  respecting 
his  journey  when  they  wont  to  India ; and  whereas  there  was 
nothing  which  he  felt  so  earnestly  as  the  safety  of  Goa,  ho 
sent  off  a caiur  without  delay,  carrying  a message  to  Diogo 
Mendez,  with  au  account  of  his  coming  ; and  he  wrote  to 
the  judges  ami  aldermen'  of  the  pleasure  it  would  give  him 
to  revisit  them,  and  that  he  was  getting  himself  in  readiness 
to  be  with  them  immediately,  and  that  ho  relied  upon  God^s 
mercy  to  give  him  a good  revenge  upon  the  Turks  of 
Benastarira,  and  he  sent  them  a warrant  for  Manuel  de 
Lacerda  to  bo  captain  of  the  city,  and  Duarte  de  Melo  chief 
captain  of  the  sea  until  his  own  arrival. 

As  soon  as  the  arrival  of  Afonso  Dalboquerque  was  known 
in  Goa,  there  was  general  rejoicing  throughout  the  city,  and 
a great  ringing  of  bells  and  firing  of  salutes,  for  every  one 
looked  npon  himself  as  redeemed  from  death.  When  the 
catur  had  sailed  off,  there  arrived  a message  from  Diogo 
Correa,  Captain  of  Canauor,  to  report  that  the  merchants 
brought  news  that  a gp-eat  fleet  of  Rumos  had  set  sail  from 
Suez,  coming  to  help  the  Hidalcilo  against  Goa,  and  this 
had  been  prepared  as  soon  as  it  became  known  that  Afonso 
Dalboquerque  had  sailed  away  to  Malaca,  When  be  beards, 
* Vffcafhrru. 


AFONSO  DAI^BOQUEBQUF. 


207 


this,  Afonso  Dalboquerque  became  very  unhappy,  because 
he  had  a very  small  fleet  which  would  serve  for  goin^  in 
search  of  them,  as  he  had  originally  intended and  while 
affairs  wore  in  this  condition,  and  he  himself  undecided 
which  undertaking  he  should  enter  upon  first  (viz.,  the  relief 
of  Goa  or  attack  on  the  Rumes),  on  the  20th  day  of  August,  ^ 
in  the  year  [fifteen  hundred  and]  twelve,  D.  Garcia  de  No- 
ronha,  who  had  set  out  in  the  preceding  year  with  six  ships, 
and  wintered  at  Mozambique,  arrived  /'  and  Jorge  de  Melo 

‘ See  p.  65. 

* This  expedition  and  ita  rcaulta  are  thus  briefly  tabulated  in  the 
Armada  da  IndiV’,  Brit.  Mus.,  Add.  MS.  2090*2,  f.  14 

“ Dom  Grracia  de  Noronha  Cappitam  mdr. 

“ Anno  de  1511. 

“ 6 naos  a 25  de  Mar^o,  e a 8 de  Abril. 

Dom  Gracia  de  Noronha  Capitao  mor  de  seia  naos,  partio  a vintc 
<;inco  de  Mar(jo:  CapiUes  Bom  Ayres  da  Gama,  Pero  Mascarenhas, 
Christouao  de  Brito,  Jorge  de  Brito,  Manoel  de  Castro  Aloof orado : Foy 
Capitao  mor  do  mar  Dom  Gracia  de  Noronha,  e destas  seis  Naos  b6  ires 
passarao  a India,  £ a Nao  de  Jorge  de  Brito  descobrio  o penedo  de  Sao 
Pedro. 

“ Neste  anno  toraou  Affonso  do  Albuquerque  Malaca,  eem  Agosto  fez 
a fortaleza,  de  que  foy  o primeiro  Capitao  liuy  de  Brito  Patalim,  a que 
pos  nome  “ Nossa  Senhora  da  AssumpijuO.” 

“ Pedro  Mascarenhas  foy  na  nflo  Santa  Eufemia^  Jorge  de  Brito  em 
Santa  Maria  da  X?u,  hjanoel  de  Castro  Alcoforado  em  ^S'.  Pedro^  Christo- 
vam  de  Brito  em  Santa  Maria  de  Belem^  D.  Ayres  da  Gama  em  Santa 
Maria  da^Piedade. 

Destas  seis  nada  sb  tres  passaram  A India,  a saber  as  duaa  de  Christo- 
vam  de  Brito,  je  D.  Aires  da  Gama,  quo  partirao  destc  Keino  doze  diaa 
depois  do  Cappitam  mdr,  e Pedro  Mascayeuhas,  que  o mesmo  Cappitam 
mdr  mandou  de  Mozambique  (aonde  chegou  com  muito  trabalho)  & India 
para  tirar  de  confuzara  aos  que  nella  esUvao  com  sua  chegada. 

“ Successo. — Seguindo  Dom  Gracia  sua  viagem,  e nam  jx)dendo  do- 
brar  0 Cabo  de  Sto,  Agostinljo,  quiz  o seu  Piloto  fazerse  na  volta  de  Guin6 
para  tomar  outra  inais  larga  sobre  o mesmo  Cabo,  ua  qual  travessa  se 
ouvera  de  porder  em  hum  penedo,  que  acharam  qo  meyo  daquello  Golfao, 
no  qual  de  noute  foy  dar  a nAo  S.  Pedro^  Cappitam  Jorge  de  Brit5,  que 
fez  farol  As  outras,  que  vinhAm  na  sua  eetcira,  por  razam  do  qual  perigo, 
do  nom^  da  nad,  que  deu  no  penedo,  elle  ouvo  o que  hoje  tern  de  S. 
Pedrs.” 


208 


COMMENTAfUKS  OF 


Pereira,  who  had  set  sail  that  year  from  the  kingdom  of 
Poftugal,  as  chief  Captain  of  eight  ships,'  with  a large  body 
of  men  on  board,  whom  the  King  D.  Manuel  sent  in  con- 
sequence of  his  belief  that  Afonso  Dalboquerque  was  lost, 

* The  expedition  here  referred  to,  is  thus  tabulated  in  the  “ Armada 
daludia”,  Brit.  Mus.,  Add.  MS.  20!)024  f.  15: — 

Jorge  de  Mello  I’ereira  Capitain  mdr  de  outo  naos,  e 
(iracia  do  Sousa  Capitnm  mdr  de  quatro  naos,  quo 
fazem  as  12  m duas  Capitanias, 

“Anno  de  1612. 

“12  velaa  a 26  de  Mar^o  partiu  a mayor  parte  dollas. 

“Jorge  do  Mello  Pereira  CapiUo  moor  de  oito  naos,  e CapitOo  mCr 
Gracia  do  Sousa  das  outras  quatro:  partio  a Vinte  e ^inco  de  mar(;o: 
Capitdes  Jorge  do  Albuqueixiue,  Gotujalo  Pereira,  Loppo  VSz  do  Sam- 
payo,  Gaspar  Pereira,  Doin  JoJo  d'lCfa,  Jorge  da  Siluoira,  SimSo  de 
Mirida,  Francisco  Nogueira,  Antonio  liaposo  de  Beja,  Pero  de  Albu- 
querque; A Nao  de  Francisco  Nogucira  se  perdeo  nos  baixoa  de  Angoya, 
E saluouse  a geute. 

“Jorge  de  Albuquerque  filho  do  Joao  de  Albuquerque  na  Nao  Auztire 

Goncjalo  Pereira  filho  de  Gonyalo  Pereira  na  Cvnrei^ao^’:  Jorge  da 
Silveira  no  Uotafufjo  Siiuara  de  Miranda  nas  Virtudes  D.  JoSo  d’E(ja, 
ou  de  SA  (coiuo  diz  outra  Jlela^no)  na  JAn/Ja/rwa  ~ Francisco  Nogueira 
cm  S.  Antonio  perdido  --  Loppo  Vaz  de  Sampayo  era  *SV7?dfl  Cniz^  Pero 
de  Albuquerque  fiUio  de  •Jorge  de  Albuquerque  na  Basiiam  = Antonio 

Raposo  de  Beja  eni Gaspar  Pereira  que  ora  para  servir  de  secretario 

de  Afifouso  de  Albuquerque,  como  o tinha  sido  de  Dorn  Francisco  do 
Almeida,  na  uaA  Santo  Antonio  o Grande. 

“ Neste  anno  se  fez  a fortaleza  de  Calicut  a qae  se  pos  nome  N.  Sen^ 
horn  da  Conceifdo^  de  que  foy  primeiro  CapitSo  Francisco  Nogueira. 

“Successos. — A usl6  Santo  Antonio^  Capitam  Francisco  l^ogneira,  se 
perdeu  nos  baixos  de  Angoxa,  onde  morreo  quasi  toda  a gentc,  e elle  por 
nam  saber  nadar  se  deixou  ficar  com  dous  filhos  seus  sobrCj  o que  appare- 
cia  da  naA,  e na  baxamar  esprayou  tanto  que  a pd  enxuto  se  r^olhou  a 
huma  das  Islas  de  Angoxa,  onde  os  Mouros  o tomarSo,  e depois  derSo 
pelo  seu  Xequo,  que  Antonio  de  Saldauha  cativou,  quando  foy  vingar  as 
mortes  que  os  Mouros  daquellas  llhas  tinbam  dado  a alguns  dos  nossos, 
que  a ellas  forAo  buscar  mantimentos.  « 

“No  Mesmoianno  de  1512 
. 1 Navio  a 13  de  Julho. 

“A  13  de  Julho  partio  hum  Caraleiro  por  nonje  J(^ Chanoca  cm 
hum  na?io  a buscar  a carga  da  NaA  Gakga,  que,  por  nam  iMtar  paiiA 
nayegar,  descarregou  em  Mo9ambiqae.” 


AFONSO  DALBOQUERQUE. 


209 


and  the  invasion  of  £ho  Rnraes  certain  I#  take  place^  in 
accordance  with  that  which  Lourenc^o  Moreno  and  Antonio 
Real  had  written  to  him  from  India. 

And  at  the  arrival  of  these  two  fleets  Afonso  Dalbo- 
querquo  became  very  greatly  pleased,  and  returned  many 
thanks  to  our  Lord  that  this  had’faDeii’  out  at  that  very 
time,  and  much  more  was  he  pleased  at  tho  arrival  of  his 
nephew  D.  Garcia,  as  well  on  account  of  the  good  qualities 
of  his  person,  as  also  because  hf)  would  help  him  in  tho 
Indian  troubles  which  grow  heavier  every  day,  and  tho 
King  D.  Manuel  wrote  that  ho  ordered  him  to  be  Chief 
Captain  of  that  fleet,  and  if  there  should  arise  any  neces- 
sity of  his  presence  to  assist  Afonso  Daiboquerqae,  then  ho 
was  to  remain  in  India  as  Chief  Captain  of  tho  Sea ; and 
because  Lorenzo  Moreno,  Antonio  Real,  and  Diogo  Pereira, 
had  written  to  the  King  D.  M.anuel,  showing  how  Goa  was 
besieged,  and  declaring  tlio  little  need  there  was  of  the 
position,  severely  censuring  Afonso  Dalboquerque’s  wishes 
to  maintain  that  city,  for  they  thought  that  thus  tlioy  would 
be  revenged  upon  him  for  his  reprehensions  of  tiieir  vices, 
and  the  malpractices  of  which  they  had  been  guilty  in  their 
offices,  against  the  service  of  the  King  ; therefore,  in  view 
of  this  information  the  King  wrote  to  Afonso  Balboquorquo 
that  it  would  please  him  very  much  that  ho  should  discuss 
this  question  [of  retaining  possession  of  Goa]  with  his  cap- 
tains and  officers ; and  if  it  should  bo  universally  admitted 
advisable  towithdraw  from  Goa,  then  ho  was  to  destroy  it, 
yet  ho  never  w’ould  bo  blind  to  tho  fact  that  Aloiiso  Dalbo- 
querque  had  on  two  occasions  gained  it  from  the  Moors  with 
so  great  a labour  and  personal  risk,  for  by  so  doing  lie  had 
done  him  great  service. 

Afonso  Dalboquerquo,  perceiving  that  all  this  was 
prompted  by  Duarte  do  liernos  and  Gon^alo  do  Sequoira, 
vjho,  being  ashamed  at  not  having  been  with  him  at  tho 
taking  of  that  city,  seized  this  opportunity  of  screening 
^ VOL.  111. 


210 


COMHSKTABIES  OF 


themselves^  pnt^ff  for  a time  this  business^  without  men* 
tioning  it  to  any  one,  and  when  the  attadk  upon  Benas- 
tarim  was  accomplished  he  did  what  the  King  ordered  him 
to  do,  as  will  be  related  hereafter. 


CHAPTER  XLV. 

How  the  great  Afonco  Di  lbofiuerque  set  out  from  Cochira  with  the  in- 
tentiou  of  going  in  aearrh  of  the  RunieH ; and  how  ho  proceeded  to 
besiege  the  fortress  of  Benastarim. 

At  the  receipt  of  this  intelligenco  of  th«  coming  of  the 
fleet  of  the  Rumes,  the  groat  Afonso  Balboquerqiie  hastened 
on  his  departure  more  rapidly ; and,  although  his  fleet  was 
not  so  great  as  to  be  able  to  resist  the  power  which  it  was 
reported  the  Rumes  were  bringing,  because  the  principal 
ships  that  were  in  India — and  of  which  he  could  avail  him- 
self— were  found  to  be  in  a very  decayed  condition  when  he 
arrived  from  his  voyage  to  Malaca,  on  account  of  the  care- 
lessness which  the  Klng^s  officers,  who  were  stationed  at 
Cochim,  had  shewn  in  looking  after  them ; nevertheless, 
buoyed  up  by  the  hope  which  he  had  of  Our  Lord’s  assist- 
I ance,  he  set  out  for  Goa  on  the  tenth  of  September,  in  the 
year  [fifteen  hundred  and]  twelve,  with  a fleet  of  sixteen 
sail,  and  four  which  he  was  to  take  up  at  Goa,  with  the  in- 
tention of  going  in  search  of  the  Rumes;  but  when  he 
reached  Cananor,  somewhat  late  on  account  of  the  adverse 
state  of  the  wind,  he  found  the  report  of  the  coming  of  the 
Rumes  looked  upon  as  somewhat  uncertain,  and  hereupon 
he  sent  two  of  the  ships  from  amdng  those  which  had 
come  from  Portugal  and  accompariied  him  thither,  to  re- 
turn to  Cochim  and  take  in  their  cargo ; and  then  he  set 
sail  from  Cananor,  and  sailed  over  the  bar  of  Goa,  with  de- 
termination of  putting  his  hands  upon  the  Captains  of  tl^ 
Hidalc&o  who  were  in  Benastarim ; and  by  means  of  some 


ATOKSO  DALBOQUERQITB. 


211 


Moors  whom  he  captured  iu  a ship  which  came  from  Adera, 
he  was  informed  that  no  fleet  of  the  Rumes  would  come  to 
India  during  that  year,  for  it  was  reported  that  they  in- 
tended first  of  all  to  take  Adem  and  so  secure  the  coun- 
tries along  tho  Straits  [of  the  Red  Sea],  in  order  that  our 
fleet  might  not  be  able  to  navigate  there. 

Having  therefore  cast  anchor  on  tho  bar,  Afonso  Dalbo- 
querque  declared  to  the  Cay/tains  that  ho  had  made  up  his 
mind  to  go  up  against  Bonastarim  before  the  Hidalcao  could 
know  of  his  arrival,  while  they  wont  to  the  city  with  all 
their  fleet,  for  he  desired  to  make  for  Old  Goa,  in  order  to 
forestall  the  p^'ss  over  tho  sea  before  tho  Hidalcfto  could  be- 
siege it  by  land ; and  although  the  peril  was  considerable, 
he  was  determined  to  force  a way  through  the  artillery  of 
the  Turks,  and  isolate  them  in  such  a manner  that  lio  suc- 
cour could  possibly  reach  them,  for  the  river  had  sufficient 
depth  of  water  in  it  for  tho  ships,  to  draw  up  quite  close  to 
the  fortress,  and  even  to  ram  tho  bulwarks. 

As  soon  as  this  had  been  arranged,  Afonso  Dalboquorque 
gave  orders  for  the  disembarkation  of  all  the  men-at-arms 
who  were  on  board  tho  vessels,  for  they  were  to  accompany 
him,  and  in  their  place  he  shipped  a hundred  mariners  and 
bombardi'ers  picked  out  of  tho  whole  fleet,  and  furnished 
them  with  the  best  artillery  he  had,  and  plenty  of  powder 
and  shot,  and  appointed  to  tho  captainship  over  them  Tris- 
tfto  de  Miranda,  of  tho  ship  S.  Pedro;  Pero  do  Afonseca,  of 
the  Sancta  Maria  da  Ajuda,  i,e,,  Saint  Manj  of  the  Aid; 
Viconto  Dalboquerque,  of  the  small  Ajuda;  Antonio  Raposo, 
of  the  ship  Ferros i.e.,  Irons;  Garcia  de  Sousa,  of  a Malabar 
ship;*  and  Aires  da  Silva,  of  the  ship  Rosairoy  Lc,,  Rosary y 
whom  he  made  chief  captain  of  all  these  ships,  and  Afonso 
Dalboquerque  himself  went  in  a caiur,^  When  all  was  in 

> This  was  one  of  the  sliips  brought  by  Jorge  de  Mello  in  the  1512 
fleet  froih^ortugal. 

* iiarcia  de  Sousa  had  commanded  the  Sdo  GAo  iu  the  above  fleet. 

I'  2 


212 


COMMENTARIES  OF 


readiness,  ho  commanded  D.  Garcia  [de  Noruuuaj  w Lii»jB.e  his 
way  with  the  rest  of  the  whole  fleet  to  Qop.,  and  get  ready 
against  his  arrival  all  the  things  that  were  necessary  to  pro- 
ceed by  land  to  Benastarim,  and  :aot  to  allow  any  one  of  the 
inhabitants  of  the  city  to  go  forth  without  his  special  permis- 
sion; and  then  he  himself  set  sail  and  made  good  his  entrance 
into  Old  (xoa;  and  as  soon  as  he  reached  in  front  of  the  fortress 
of  Bonastarira  he  sent  word  tcfTristilo  de  Miranda  to  stand 
in  with  his  ship  S.  Phh'o  until  he  was  at  the  distance  of  a 
gun-shot  from  the  fortress,  while  he  himself  with  the  other 
captains  of  those  ships  would  follow  him  up,  and  there  they 
all  remained  until  the  artillery  of  the  Tiiphs  somewhat 
abated  from  the  fury  with  which  they  had  begun  their  fire. 

When  our  men  had  lost  thoir  fear  and  alarm  at  the  con- 
tinued flring  of  the  enemy,  Afonso  Dalboquerquo  com- 
manded the  Captains  to  draw  yet  a little  nearer  with  thoir 
ships,  and  tiarcia  de  Sousa  to  lay  his  ship  athwart  between 
the  fleet  and  the  fortress,  for  it  was  a very  largo  vessel,  and 
would  serve  in  that  position  as  a shelter  for  the  other  ves- 
sels. But  the  Turks,  who  were  not  altogether  pleased  at 
the  proximity  of  onr  ships  to  them,  fired  so  many  shots  at 
them,  and  so  furiously,  that  they  swept  clean  across  the 
decks.  And  as  our  men  were  just  in  the  line  of  fire  of  a 
basilM,^  which  the  Turks  had  mounted  upon  a rampart 
flush  with  the  water-line,  Afonso  Dalboquerquo  rmUo  ready 
a barge  with  a gun  metal  camel, ^ and  ordered  his  Constable 
to  take  six  bombardiers  and  go  by  night  and  anbhor  it  close 
to  the  Turkish  bulwarks  in  front  of  their  guns,  and  try  their 
best  to  silence  the  basilisk. 

The  Constable  was  so  brave  a soldier  that,  without  the 
least  fear  of  the  danger  he  ran,  carried  out  the  orders  which 
Afonso  Dalboquerque  had  given  him,  and  when  morning 

* Bazalisco ; an  ancient  kind  of  cannon^,’  of  large  calibre^  and  very 
long,  carrying  a ball  of  a hundre<I  and  sixty  pounds  weight. 

» Camtlo ; see  vol,  i,  p.  78.  ' 


AFONSO  DALBOQUBRQUB. 


213 


broke  he  began  to  fire  tho  camel  with  round  shot^  and  it  was 
Our  Lord’s  will  that  one  of  the  shots  struck  the  basilisk  on 
the  mouth  and  broke  it,  and  killed  two  of  the  renegade 
bombardiers,  one  of  whom  was  a Gallician,  the  other  a Cas- 
tilian, who  had  fled  away  at  the  first  entry  of  the  Portuguese 
into  Goa  and  gone  over  to  the  Moors. 

Aires  da  Silva,  who  found  himself  in  the  line  of  tho 
basilisk,  ordered  his  ship  to  be  hauled  more  forward,  but 
the  mariners  managed  these  operations  so  badly  that  they 
ran  tho  ship  athwart  the  enemy’s  guns.  And  tho  Turks, 
perceiving  tho  embarrassed  state  of  our  men,  fired  at  them 
with  so  many  guns  broadside  that  they  almost  dashed  them 
to  pieces;  and  it  happened  that  one  of  tho  shots  wont  through 
the  ship’s  prow,  and  striking  throe  barrels  of  powder  that 
were  in  that  place  they  blew  up,  and  part  of  tho  hatchways, 
the  castles,  and  tho  deck  wore  destroyed,  and  two  plauks 
close  upon  the  water-line  w'oro  blown  oft’,  although  no  other 
casualty  occurred  among  the  crew  beyond  the  burning  of 
three  cabin  boys,  but  tho  crew  were  so  alarmed  that  they 
all  jumped  overboard,  and  Aires  da  Silva  was  left  alone  in 
the  ship.  When  the  Turks  beheld  the  misfortune  of  our 
men  they  raised  a great  shout  and  blew  their  trumpets. 

But  Afonso  Balboquerque,  when  he  saw  Aires  da  {Silva  in 
this  predicament,  got  into  a skiff  with  four  men,  and  under 
the  fire  of  the  Turks  he  got  up  to  the  ship  and  called  out  to 
tho  crew  who  were  swimming  away  to  return  to  him,  re- 
proaching them  with  leaving  him  thus  iinprotocted,  and 
using  towards  them  words  of  reprehension  fur  dosertiug 
their  captain  in  so  shamoful  a manner.  And  when  tJio 
mariners  saw  him  in  his  skiff  passing  along  niuler  firo  in 
front  of  so  many  guns,  they  grew  ashamed  of  what^they  had 
done,  and  took  courage  and  turned  back  again  to  tho  ship; 
while  he,  although  the  guns  of  tho  enemy  did  not  cease  to 
fire,  calJed  dut  to  his  mate,  who  was  coming  on  in  a boat, 
to  go  and  haul  at  tlie  poop  of  the  ship  so  as  to  draw  her  off 


214 


COMMENTARIES  OE 


from  the  gnns’  mouths ; and  as  soon  as  the  ship  had  thus 
been  hauled  off,  ho  ordered  a number  of  oauJkers,  with  hides 
and  all  other  necessaries,  to  go  to  the  ship  and  cover  over 
the  holes  made  by  the  explosion  on  the  water  line. 

While  the  caulkers  wero  thus  occupied,  Aires  da  Silva 
with  the  mariners  baled  out  all  the  water  which  the  ship 
had  made ; but,  as  the  repairs  could  not  be  finished  on  that 
day,  so  soon  as  night  came  oh  Afonso  Dalboquerque  gave 
orders  to  draw  off,  and  that  Tristilo  do  Miranda  should  cause 
the  ship  S.  Pedro  to  be  hauled  in  front  of  the  small  ships, 
and  the  latter  at  nightfall  ordered  his  cables  to  be  strength- 
ened, because  in  the  daytime  not  a boat  dar^  venture  out. 

When  the  Turks  saw  the  ship  they  began  at  once  to  fire 
a very  largo  gun  at  her,  and  at  the  very  first  shots  swept 
her  decks  clean  from  one  side  to  the  other.  And  although 
our  men  underwent  danger  with  considerable  risk  of  their 
lives,  yet  the  Turks  did  not  get  off  easily,  for  our  artillery 
had  killed  a great  many  of  their  men  and  many  horses 
inside  the  fortress,  and  had  thrown  down  all  the  wall  in  such 
a manner  that  Ho^alcd^o  and  his  captains  dared  not  go  into 
the  keep  because  of  the  danger  of  going  along  towards  it, 
and  be  ordered  his  men  to  repair  during  the  night  the  wall 
which  our  artillery  knocked  down  during  the  day.  * 


CHAPTER  XLVL 

* • 

How  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  ordered  the  stockade,  wherewith 

the  Turks  had  surrounded  the  fortress  in  order  that  our  ships  should 
not  go  insidCf  to  be  pulled  up ; and  how  he  went  to  the  city  after 
having  put  them  inside,  and  what  fui'ther  took  place. 

« 

While  affairs  werti  thus  situated  the  great  Afonso  Dalbo- 
querque, in  order  to  completely  cut.  off’  all  chance  of  the 
Turks  receiving  their  wished-for  reinforcements,*  sent  a 
message  to  D.  Garcia  de  Noronha  that  he  should  send  4iim 


APONSO  DALBOQUEBQUK. 


215 


two  small  ships  and  a barge  with  their  arromhadas^  very 
strongs  and  artillery,  and  order  them  to  pass  through  the 
shallow  pass,®  in  order  thereby  to  assault  the  fortress  upon 
that  side ; and  he  was  to  have  in  readiness  many  waggons 
laden  with  cannon  balls,  and  gunpowder,  and  many  man- 
telets, benches,^  gabions,*  pickaxes,  and  largo  and  small 
artillery  on  carriages,  and  everything  else  that  was  needed 
to  attack  the  fortress  by  sea  and  by  land,  and  the  captains 
of  the  trained-bands  to  have  their  men  rbady,  for  as  soon  as 
he  had  the  ships  within  the  stockade  he  would  be  with  him. 

At  receipt  of  this  message  Dom  Garcia  ordered  his  ships 
to  be  made  rq^dy,  with  their  arrortihadaa  made  of  coco-nut 
fibre^  and  barrels,  and  the  barge  to  bo  prepared  and  fur- 

» Arrombadas ; cables  lashed  I'ouinl  a heavily  laden  ship,  with  empty 
barrels  on  the  water’s  edge,  to  give  additional  buoyancy  in  shallow  places. 

* / too  aeco.  The  city  of  Goa  had  no  walla  of  its  own,  though  at  the  time 
when  Linschoten  and  others  visited  it  the  ancient  walls  existed,  but  with- 
out gates.  It  was  protecte<l  not  only  by  the  fortifications  raises!  for  the 
defence  of  the  harbour,  but  also  by  the  long  wall  covering  chielly  the 
eastern  side  of  the  island.  This  began  with  a fort  in  the  north-east 
part  of  the  island  at  Daugiin,  and  extending  from  that  point  to  the 
church  of  SSo  Braz,  wiis  joined  there  to  an  old  Muhammadan  fort 
which  had  been  rebuilt  by  the  Portuguese  ; thence  it  proceeded  to 
Benastarim,  where  it  met  the  fortress  of  S4o  Thiago.  It  then  took  a 
southern  direction  to  the  fort  of  Mangueiral,  and  thence  to  that  of  S.  Joao 
Baptista.  This  wall  had  three  principal  gates,  at  which  sentinels  kept 
watch  day  and  night,  and  as  people  passed  through  them  in  crossing  over 
to  the  Muhammadan  territory  on  the  mainland,  they  were  called  jmssos. 
They  corresponded  with  the  three  forts  abovementioned — tiic  jmsso  of 
Daugim,  to  the  north-east ; the  pnsso  secco^  shallow  pass,  or  for^j  of  fciao 
Braz,  the  east ; and  tliat  of  Beuastariin  to  the  south-east.  This  last 
was  most  frequented  by  the  people,  especially  as  articles  of  daily  con- 
sumption were  carried  through  it  from  the  mainland  to  the  city. — J.  N. 
da  Fonseca,  ,Sietch  of  Goa.  Bombay,  1878,  p.  163.  See  also  the  coloured 
plan  of  Goa  in  MS.  Sloan.  5027a,  folio  52. 

» Bancos  de  pinchar ; an  heraldic  term,  explained  by  Bluteau.  Here 
it  appears  to  signify  a three-legged  stool  or  bench  used  in  storming 
operations.  * Cestos. 

• Com.suali  arrombadas  de  Cairo  e de  pipas.  Cairo  is  the  outer  or 
‘]&brou8  shell  of  the  coco-nut,  with  which  in  the  Maidive  Islandd,  aud 
other  parts  of  India,  all  ships’  cordage  and  rigging  is  made. 


216 


COMMENTABIRS  OF 


nished  with  a large  gun ; and  he  conferred  the  captaincies 
of  these  ships  upon  Fernfto  Gomez  do  Lemoa  and  Antonio 
de  Matos,  and  that  of  the  barge  upon  Jofto  Gomez;  and  aa 
soon  as  they  were  ready  they  proceeded  on  their  way  up  the 
river,  and  when  they  tried  to  pass  over  the  shallow  pass,  the 
ship  which  Antonio  do  Matos  commanded,  being  larger  than 
the  others,  took  the  ground,  and  it  was  necessary  to  remove 
from  her  the  arromhadas  with  which  she  was  supported  in 
order  to  pass  over,  and  because  the  weight  of  the  artillery 
which  she  carried  upon  her  deck  was  very  great  the  ship 
•canted  over  and  capsized,  ^ 

Nevertheless,  Fernilo  Gomez  de  Lenios  and'  Joao  Gomez 
passed  over,  and  on  arriving  at  the  fortress  fixed  imme- 
diately upon  a bulwark  which  was  on  that  side,  and  berthed 
themselves  so  close  to  it  that  the  Turks  from  the  top  of  it 
shot  some  of  their  crew'  with  matchlocks  and  with  arrows, 
and  swept  the  ve^ssols  through  and  through  with  their  guns; 
but,  notwithstanding  this,  like  naen  of  conrago  they  stuck 
to  their  post  and  would  not  quit  it.  And  when  Rogalcao 
saw  that  an  atfack  was  made  upon  him  on  that  quarter  also, 
he  issued  imuiediate  orders  that  four  large  guns  should  bo 
convoyed  to  that  part  of  the  fortifications;  and  in  the  lower 
part  of  the  curtain  of  the  wall,  and  above  also,  lie  com- 
manded that  guns  should  be  placed,  and  by  these  means  he 
shot  through  our  ships  from  one  side  to  the  other, iSut  our 
party,  with  all  this  danger,  did  not  fail  to  pay  him  out  for  it 
in  the  •nine  ooind 

And  when  Afonso  Dalboquerque  had  made  sure  that  no 
reinforcement  could  possibly  reach  the  enemy  from  that 
quarter,  either  of  troops  or  supplies,,  he  made  up  his  mind 
to  pull  up  a stockade  with  which  the  Moors  had  encircled 
the  fortress,  and  to  berth'  the  stips  inside  the  space  in  order 
to  have  their  decks  flush  with  the  walk,  and  ordered  Tristao 
de  Miranda  and  Aires  da  Silva,  who  wore  with  fiim^in  the„» 
‘ Niio  ikixavam  de  Iho  pagar  na  inesma  moeda.  * 


AFONSO  DALBOQUERQUB, 


217 


sliip,  because  the  ship  of  the  latter  captain  remained  out- 
side for  the  reasons  already  shewn,  to  drive  the  ship^  S, 
Pedro  against  the  palisades  in  order  to  overthrow  them, 
and  so  make  a large  hole  through  which  they  could  get  in, 
for  that  which  the  Moors  had  left  for  convenience  of  getting 
to  the  fortress  was  very  narrow.  And  behind  these  he  sent 
Poro  de  Afonseca,  Antonio  Raposo,  and  Vicente  Dalbo- 
querque  to  do  likewise;  and  all  the  while  that  these  captains 
were  running  their  ships  with  great  Courage  close  up  to  the 
stockade  it  was  not  without  great  risk,  for  they  were  well 
plied  with  the  cnemy^s  artillery,  arrows,  and  gunshot.  And, 
as  soon  as  night  foil,  Afonso  Dalboquerquo  went  up  to  them, 
and  thus  they  destroyed  a largo  quantity  of  the  stockade. 

When  this  had  been  accomplished  ho  commanded  Tristfto 
do  Miranda  to  lay  out  an  anchor  beyond  the  palisades  and 
haul  in  the  ship  8,  Pedro  upon  the  cable  as  far  up  inside 
the  space  thus  thrown  open  as  he  could,  and  the  other  ships 
to  follow  after.  And  as  soon  as  the  Turks  perceived  that 
our  side  were  occupied  by  night  with  getting  the  ships  into 
positions  inside  the  stockade,  they  threw  down  burning 
trusses  of  straw  to  the  foot  of  the  wall,  and  taking  aim  at 
our  men  by  means  of  the  bright  light  thug  afforded,  fired 
their  guns  at  them ; and  our  men  being  now  opposite  to  the 
very  mouths  of  the  gnus,  and  Afonso  Dalboquerque  running 
groat  risk:  in  the  skiff  which  ho  used,  the  captains  begged 
him  earnestly  to  withdraw  outside  the  palisade,  because  in 
thus  exposing  himself  to  danger  the  whole  of  the  enterprise 
might  bo  put  in  jeopardy ; for  he  ought  to  taka  rest,  they 
said,  while  they  carried  out  in  the  best  and  bravest  possible 
manner  the  undertaking  which  ho  had  appointed  them 
to  do. 

But  Afonso  Dalboquerque,  with  Iris  accustomed  invinciblo 
spirit,  replied  that  he  could  not  remain  at  rest  while  he  saw, 
fiJbem  im^heir  present  dangerous  position,  but  they  must  do 
what  he  had  ordered,  for  he  did  not  intend  to  leave  them 


218 


COMMENTARIES  OF 


without  knowing  in  what  condition  they  wo^je  left.  And 
wheii  ho  had  got  the  ships  inside  the  stockade  all  ranged 
in  order  so  as  to  attack  the  fortress,  he  retired  outside 
with  the  intention  of  going  to  the  city  to  make  ready  to 
bring  up  a reinforcement  by  land,  and,  as  he  withdrew,  the 
enemy  picked  off  two  of  the  black  men  who  were  rowing  in 
his  skiff ; and  when  ho  got  outside  he  made  his  way  to  the 
pardo,  and  from  it  despatched  two  Canarese  peons  to  go  to 
the  mainland  and  take  captive  some  one  who  could  speak 
the  native  tongue  and  give  news  of  the  HidalcfiLo;  so  they 
went  and  caught  two  Moors  who  were  coming  to  the  fortress 
of  Beuastarim,  and  from  them  he  learned  that  I(;ufularij^ 
was  on  the  march  with  two  thousand  men  to  relieve  the 
fortress,  and  that  within  the  fortress  there  was  a com- 
bined force  of  about  six  thousand  Turks,  Rumes,  and  Cora- 
Qones,  and  of  the  other  troops  there  were  about  three  thou- 
sand, including  a hundred  musketeers  and  three  hundred 
horsemen. 

On  hearing  this  news,  Afonso  Dalboquerque  appointed 
Aires  da  Silva  chief  captain  of  the  ships,  and  attached  to 
his  service  a pardo  to  act  as  a tender  for  supplying  water 
and  necessary  provisions,  and  told  him  to  attack  the  for- 
tress on  the  side  of  the  sea  with  his  forces  directly  that  he 
(Afonso)  fell  upon  them  on  the  land  side.  And  having 
arranged  this  plan  he  set  sail  for  the  city  in  the  which 
had  brought  him.  This  operation  went  on  for  eight  days 
and  eight  nights,  and,  daring  the  whole  of  the  time,  the 
Turks  never  ceased  firing  their  artillery,  whereby  ouV  ships 
were  well  riddled  because  they  were  close  to  the  ramparts, 
and  in  the  direct  line  of  tho  guns. , And  our  people  who 
wore  engaged  in  this  onterpriso  used  to  say  that,  during 
these  eight  days,  th&  Turks  fired  more  than  four  thousand 
times  at  them  with  guns  of  large  here,  beside  the  smaller 

* This  is  probably  the  Portuguese  rendering  of  the  Arabic  nam^ 
Ymnf^xd-Araj ; t.e./' YuBof  the  Lame”. 


AF0K80  DALBOQUBBQUE. 


219 


shot,  and  froT;a  the  top  of  the  wall  used  to  fire  at  them  with 
arrows  and  matchlocks,  whereby  they  wounded  a great  many 
of  our  men.  The  masts,  yards,  and  shrouds  of  the  ships 
were  so  thickly  covered  with  arrows  which  had  stuck  into 
them  that  it  was  a terrible  thing  to  behold  them. 

Tristao  de  Miranda  and  Vicente  Dal6oquerquo,  although 
at  this  time  they  were  but  youths,  bore  themselves  very 
bravely  in  those  days,  and*  became  so  stunned  with  the 
continual  roar  of  the  Turkish  artiHery'  and  our  own  (for 
their  ships  were  in  the  vanguard  all  through  the  affair), 
that  for  a long  time  afterwards  they  could  not  hear  any- 
thing. Aires » da  Silva,  also,  on  his  part,  performed  the 
deeds  of  a very  valiant  cavalier;  and  the  accident  which 
happened  to  his  ship  was  owing  to  the  fact  that  ho  thought 
little  of  warps  and  of  hedges,^  but  only  cared  to  bo  the  first 
of  all  to  make  an  end  of  anything,  for  he  did  not  know  what 
fear  was.  And  after  Afonso  Dalboquerquo  had  departed 
for  the  city,  Aires  da  Silva,  learning  that  on  the  other  side 
of  tho  mainland  a caravan  of  draught  oxen  had  arrived  with 
a supply  of  provisions  for  tho  fortress,  started  one  night 
with  the  men  he  had  with  him  in  his  ships,  and  fell  upon 
them  and  burnt  their  houses,  and  killed  a great  number  of 
the  Moors,  and  captured  all  the  provisions,  and  those  who 
were  left  alive  took  to  flight.  Pero  de  Afonseca  and  Antonio 
Raposo*  also  on  their  part  fought  with  great  bravery,  and 
without  any  fear  of  the  enemy^s  guns  laid  out  their  anchors. 

As  for  this  enterpnse  thus  taken  in  hand  with  so  many 
guns  alid  so  many  of  the  enemy's  forces  in  a foftross,  I do 
not  believe  there  was  over  seen  or  heard  such  another  in 
those  parts  of  the  world,  for  very  often  Afonso  Dalboquerque 
used  to  chide  our  men  for  not  considering  tho  risks  in 
which  they  placed  themselves,  both  bi^dy  and  life,  for  the 
ships  were  so  battered  ^11  over  by  the  artillery  of  the  Turks 
th^re  was  not  a place  left  in  which  they  could  have 
* Nunca  atron  ik  rayeiras  ntni  dc  proius. 


220 


COMMENTABIRS  OF 


secured  themselves^  had  it  not  been  our  Lord's  will  to  pre- 
servo  them  in  that  peril. 


CHAPTEli  XLVIL 

How  the  great  Afonso  Dalboqiienjne  arrived  at  the  city  [of  Goa],  and 
of  the  great  roeeptioii  with  whicLfthe  inljabitaiits  met  him,  and  of 
the  rest  which  pasj'ed  with  the  Turks. 

After  that  the  great  Afonso  Dalboqucrque  had  succeeded 
in  ciiiting  off  the  Turks  who  wore  in  the  fortress  from  any 
succour  which  could  have  reached  them,  he,,  made  his  way 
by  water  to  Goa  in  the  catur  wliicli  had  brought  him  to  the 
fortress  i and  when  ho  had  reached  the  quay — seeing  that 
this  was  the  first  time  that  he  had  entered  the  city  since 
his  return  from  Malaca — the  inhabitants  came  down  to 
receive  him  at  the  gate  of  Saint  Cathcrino,  where  his  dis- 
embarking was  conducted  in  tlio  following  manner. 

P.  Garcia  do  Noronha,  with  all  the  crews  of  the  fleet; 
Manuel  de  Lacerda,  captain  of  the  city,  with  all  the  Fidalffoes 
who  inhabited  it;  and  i*ero  Mascarenhas,  with  the  trained 
bands;  and  the  judges  and  aldermen,  and  tlie  rest  of  the 
native  population  in  their  (‘ompany.  And  thc?y  ‘had  pre- 
pared for  him  a young  mare,  on  which  he  was  to  ride,  with 
a caparison  of  brocade,  and  stirrups,  and  all  the*  rest  of 
the  housings  of  very  finely  chased  silver,  and  a canopy 
of  brocade,  which  tlio  aldermen  of  the  city  were  to  carry; 
and,  on  arnval  at  the  gate,  they  made  him  an  oratinn,  the 
substance  of  whicli  was  the  great  delight  that  all  had  felt 
at  his  return,  and  their  joy  at  the  victory  which  our  Lord 
had  given  him  against  the  power  of  the  king  of  Malaca. 

And  when  the  hareinguo  was  finished,  Manuel  de  Lacerda 
drew  near  and  delivered  up  to  him  t)je  keys  of  the  fortress. 
And  after  all  these  ceremonies  had  been  perforrfiedy  Afons^ 
Dalboquerque  spoke  to  all  pi^eaont  with  great  love  and  kind- 


" AFONSO  DAL60QU1RQUE. 


221 


ness,  and,  riding  upon  the  young  mare,  which  they  had  pro- 
vided for  his  use^  surrounded  by  all  his  retinue,  he  begaif  his 
procession  direct  to  the  church,  all  going  in  front  of  him  on 
foot;  and,  while  he  was  yet  in  the  middle  of  the  way,  the 
clergy  came  to  receive  him  with  a cross  raised  up  aloft,  and 
no  sooner  did  Afonso  Dalboquerque  perceive  it,  than  he  got 
down  off  his  horse,  and,  falling  down  on  his  knees  before 
the  cross,  ho  declared  to  thooo  who  carried  the  canopy  that 
they  ought  rather  to  tako  tho  cross  under  it,  for  such  an 
honour  ought  not  to  be  shown  to  anything  except  that 
cross,  which  resembled  tho  one  upon  which  our  Lord  had 
suffered,  and  in,  this  manner  they  all  followed  after  it  up  to 
the  church.  Auil  when  the  sermon  was  ended,  Afonso 
Dalboquerque  again  mounted  upon  tho  young  mare,  and 
attended  by  the  canopy,  made  his  way  to  the  palace  of  the 
Qabayo,  wherein  he  lodged,  and  immediately  began  to 
attend  to  the  affairs  which  were  necessary  in  order  to  go  by 
land  against  Benastarim. 

And  when  he  was  ready  to  set  forth,  with  the  determina- 
tion of  conducting  a vigorous  storm  against  the  fortress, 
and  so  making  a broad  passage  way  whereby  a body  of 
soldiers  might  enter,  news  was  brought  to  inform  him  that 
Ro<^alc3,o'had  quitted  the  fortress  and  was  on  his  way,  march- 
ing with  a large'  forco  of  infantry  and  cavalry  in  order  of 
battle  challenge  the  city.  And  Afonso  Dalboquerque,  as 
soon  as  he  received  this  intelligence,  ordered  Manuel  de 
Lacerda,  cAptain  of  the  city,  to  bo  mounted  by  break  of  day 
— for  k was  then  night — and  Pero  Mascarenhas,  Antonio  do 
Saldanha,  Jofto  Machado,  Fernao  Caldeira,  Manuel  Fer- 
nandez, Joao  Cabeceira,  Louren^o  Prego,  and  Diogo  Fer- 
nandez the  Adail,^  to  go  with  him,  and  reconnoitre  tho 
enemy.  ' 

On  the  following  day,  early  in  the  moniing,  these  went 
put  by  the  gate,  and  proceeded  to  the  heights  over  a valley 
^ Sec  vol.  fi,  p.  137. 


222 


COMMENTABISS  OV 


where  Eo9alcao  was  bivouacing  with  his  forces;  and  as 
floofi  as  Manuol  de  Lacerda  caught  sight  pf  the  enemy  he 
sent  word  to  Afonso  Dalboquerquo  of  the  position  occupied 
by  Ro^alcfto,  and  that  the  probable  number  of  the  enemy 
were  estimated  at  three  thousand  men.  At  receipt  of  this 
intelligence,  Afonso  Dalboquerque  commanded  a sally  by 
Rny  Gon9alvez  and  Joilo  Fidalgo,  with  three  hundred  men 
of  the  train-bands,  crossbow-men,  and  musketeers,  and 
some  with  pikes, 'to  go  along  the  direct  path  and  unite 
themselves  with  .Manuel  de  Lacerda  by  way  of  reinforce- 
ment; and  behind  these  ho  sent  thirty  more  mounted  men, 
with  a message  to  Manuel  de  Lacerda  to  maintain  his  posi- 
tion, supporting  the  trained  band,  but  not  to  engage  in 
battle  with  the  Turks  ; and,  if  he  observed  that  they  wore 
determined  to  fight,  then  he  was  to  send  him  word. 

When  Ro^alc^o  perceived  that  our  men  were  few  in  num- 
bers, he  came  on  with  his  men  in  battle  array.  But  Manuel 
de  Lacerda  remained  whore  he  was,  and  would  not  fight 
with  him.  Then  Ro^alcfto,  seeing  how  determined  our  men 
were,  halted,  and  dared  not  advance  any  nearer  upon  them. 
And  while  the  two  wore  in  this  position,  JoiXo  Machado 
was  running  to  the  city,  and  ho  told  Afonso  Dalboquerque 
how  Ro9alcfto  was  on  the  point  of  offering  battle,  a’bd  it  was 
for  him  (Afonso)  to  say  what  he  desired  to  be  done.  And 
at  this  news  ho  summoned  all  the  captains  and  naiiated  to 
them  the  state  of  affairs.  And  as  soon  as  Jofto  Machado 
began  to  aflirm  that  Ro^alcSlo  was  desirous  of  fighting,  the 
opinion  of  all  was  that  the  Portuguese  ought  to  sallyt  out  in 
a body  with  all  their  men,  and  go  and  light  him. 

Afonso  Dalboquerque  replied  to  them  that  since  they  had 
decided  already  to  go  and  attack  the  fortress  by  land,  as 
they  had  already  blockaded  it  Iby  sea,  and  to  cast  the  Turks 
out  of  it,  it  did  not  seem  to  him  to  be  good  counsel  to  go 
about  all  over  the  country  skirmishing  about  with  the 
Moors,  but  rather  they  ought  to  seek  the  victorious  con- 


» AFONSO  DALBOQUEBQUB. 


223 


clnsion  of  their  undertaking  with  hearty  good  will,  for  the 
Moors  were  g6od  archers,  and  thoir  soldiers  always  in  o^en 
order,  and  lightly  armed,  and  could  close  up  and  open  out 
their  ranks  whenever  they  thought  fit,  whereas  our  men 
could  not  do  so,  for  they  were  all  heavily  armed,  and  far 
too  much  encumbered  to  manoeuvre  iij  skirmishing  order 
with  the  Turks  in  the  field ; but  over  and  above  all  these 
objections,  they  all  again  affirmed  that  he  ought  to  sally  out 
and  fight  the  Turks. 

Thereupon,  Afonso  Dalboquorque  finding  himself  com- 
pelled by  the  weight  of  this  counsel,  ordered  the  advance 
to  be  sounded^ ^and  the  gates  opened,  and  he  sallied  out  into 
the  open  country  with  the  whole  of  his  forces,  having  divided 
it  into  three  companies. 

In  the  van  (b)^  he  sent  Pero  Mascarenhas,  with  orders  to 
unite  with  Ruy  Gonsalves  and  Jofto  Fidalgo,  and  to  take 
charge  of  the  train-bands.  And  in  the  main  body  (c)  D.  Gar- 
cia [de  Noronha],  accompanied  by  Pero  Dalboquerque,  Lopo 
Vaz  de  Sampayo,*  Antonio  de  Saldanha,  Francisco  Pereira 
Pestana,  Jorge  Dalboquerque,^  Jorge  Nunez  de  Liao,  Gon- 
<;.alo  Pereira,^  D.  Jollo  D^ssa,^  Diogo  Fernandez  de  Beja, 
D.  Jofto  de  Lima,  Caspar  Pereira,^  Jorge  da  Silva,  Ruy  Gal- 
vfto,  Pero.Correa,  Jodo  Delgado,  Manuel  de  Sousa,  Jeronymo 
do  Sousa,  and  many  other  Fidalgocs  and  cavaliers ; while 
he  himself  and  the  rest  of  the  forces  followed  in  the  rear- 
guard (d)  ; and  so,  marching  in  this  order  of  battle,  in  sight 
of  the  Turks  (a),  Rogalcdo  began  to  push  on  his  battalions 
toward;^  ours. 

When  Afonso  Dalboquerque  saw  this  ho  ordered  Peru 
Mascarenhas  to  wheel  round  the  train  bands  so  as  to  face  the 
enemy  (b  2),  and  D.  Gai^jia  to  keep  on  his  way  in  quick  march 
to  their  right  (c  2),  while  he  tore  on  to  their  left,  and  im- 
proved his  position  going  up  a valley,  taking  the  Turkish 

» ‘ See  plkn.  ' 

• See  p.  208.  These  came  in  the  fleet  of  Jorge  de  Mello,  a.d.  1612. 


224 


COMMENTAFJBS  OP 


army  in  flank  (i)  2) ; but  as  D.  Garcia  got  on  considerably 
fasfer  than  he  could,  he  sent  him  word  to  hali»  and  keep  his 
ground  until  ho  himself  should  reach  the  head  of  the  valley, 
for  the  place  was  one  of  very  great  strategic  opportunity 


for  attacking  the  ^rk‘s.  Ro^alcS/O  perceiving  how  eager 
our  men  were  to  give  him  battle,  halted,  and  ordered  his 
forces  not  to  advance  any  further. 

But  Afonso  Dalboquerque,  as  he  was  an  experienced 


APONSO  DALBOQlJERQrE. 


225 


soldier,  soon  observed  that  the  Turks  desired  to  retreat,  like 
people  who  had  changed  their  original  intention,  so  he 
ordered  Pero  Mascarenhas  to  press  them  somewhat  more 
vigorously  (b3),  and  D.  Garcia  do  Noronha  to  follow  them 
along  his  lino,  and  Manuel  do  Lacerda  to  support  the  train- 
bands  with  the  cavalr}%  according  to  the  instructions  he  had 
already  received,  and  thou  the  Turks,  finding  themselves 
with  the  train-bands  in  front  of  them,  fell  into  disorder  and 
turned  round  2)  and  faced  towards  the  fortress. 


CHAPTER  XLVm. 

How  Rcx;alcao  was  put  to  flight,  and  tho  grt^at  Afonso  Dalboqnerquo 
followed  ill  pursuit  after  liiin  up  lu  the  very  walls  of  the  fortrasB  of 
lieneBtorij,  and  of  w’hat  furtJier  took  place. 

When  the  groat  Afonso  Dalboquerque  perceived  that 
Ro^alcAo  was  facing  to  the  fortress  he  ordered  Manuel  do 
Lacerda  to  fill  upon  the  Moors  with  his  mounted  men ; and 
as  our  men  were  closing  with  them  ono  thousand  native 
CanaresG  peons  became  separated  and  went  up  along  a rising 
ground.  AfonsQ  Dalboquorquo,  seeing  that  they  marched 
along  in*  disoi’der,  detached  from  his  army  a body  of  soldiers 
who  were  to  luaticouvre  so  as  to  got  in  between  those  peons 
and  the  main  body  of  the  Turks,  and  when  these  peons  saw 
that  they  were  cut  off,  they  quitted  the  road  on  which  they 
were  travelling  and  made  their  way  to  the  ford  of  Gondalij, 
becaiLie  it  was  the  nearest,  and  crossed  over  the  river,  and 
many  of  them  were  drowned  in  the  passage. 

During  this  event  Pe^o  Mascarenhas  with  the  train-bands 
had  already  come  up  with  the  JPurks  and  w^as  engaged  with 
them,  and  D.  Garcia  de  Noronha  on  flie  right  hand  was 
rapidly  coming  on ; and  both  tho  one  party  and  the  othe’!, 
fojr  they  %©re  all  now  so  very  close  to  the  fortress,  again  fell 
npoiO  the  Turks  so  courageoiiisly  that  they  caused  them  to 

VOL.  III.  Q 


226 


00MMENTAR1K8  Of 


lose  all  their  horses,  and  the  enemy  being  in  great  dread 
of  our  own  men  in  this  onslaught,  they  all  got  in  in  a crowd 
inside  the  fortress,  they  then  shut  the  gates,  leaving  a 
great  many  outside,  who  with  great  trouble  saved  them- 
selves with  headgear  which  those  who  were  inside  threw 
over  to  them;  others  ran  along  the  side  of  the  fortress  and 
made  their  entry  good  on  the  other  side,  and  many  of  these 
stuck  in  the  mud  and  were  stifled  to  death  ; others  again, 
who  preferred  to  throw  themselves  into  the  river,  were  inter- 
cepted and  put  to  death  by  Aires  da  Silva  and  other  cap- 
tains, who  came  up  in  the  boats,  and  got  out  at  the  foot  of 
the  wall  with  their  men  protected  with  shield  work,  for  they 
thought  that  the  time  had  arrived  at  which  Afonso  Dalbo- 
querquo  had  ordered  thorn  to  do  so. 

As  soon  as  the  Turks  saw  our  men  at  the  foot  of  the  wall 
they  threw  down  so  many  stones,  and  shot  bows  and 
arrows,  and  muskets  cat  them  so  continuously  that  they  were 
compelled  to  retire  with  a groat  number  of  the  detachment 
severely  wounded.  The  other  part  of  our  forces,  which  was 
stationed  on  the  land  side,  finding  themselves  close  up  to  the 
wall  of  the  fortress,  tried  which  way  were  easier  to  be  done ; 
whether,  as  some  did,  upon  the  top  of  pikes,  or,  as  others, 
jumping  on  foot  (for  the  wall  on  the  side  of  the  city  is 
lower  and  less  strong  than  on  that  of  the  river),  and  as  there 
were  some  Fidalgoes  and  Cavaliers  on  the  top,llo9alcfto 
came  up  with  a body  of  Turks  and  essayed  to  throw  them 
down  off  the  wall,  and  wounded  many  with  arrows,  musket 
shot,  poWder-caus,  and  blazing  bundles  of  hay,  without 
getting  any  advantage  over  them  ; and  as  for  the  Captains 
whom  Afonso  Dalboquerque  was  expecting  to  help  him  in 
rallying  his  men,  who  were  on  that  side,  these  were  they 
who  were  working^ery  hard  to  get  up,  helping  each  other 
np  by  the  leg;  and  the  first  who  got  up  this  was  PeroMaa* 
oarenhas,  who  was  in  command  of  the  trained  bai^s,  wh%m 
Afonso  Dalboquerque  after  the  rally  embraced  and  k^ssf4 


AFONSO  DALBOQCURQUE. 


227 


on  the  face,  whereat  some  were  scandalised,  although  Jhey 
had  no  need  to  be,  for  .besides  his  actions  that  day  like  a 
brave  cavalier,  Afonso  Dalboqiierque  was  under  an  obligation 
to  him,  for  he  had  left  the  Fortress  of  Cochim,  of  which  he 
was  Captain,  and  had  come  to  serve  the  king  in  that  war. 

Francisco  Pereira  Pestana,  who  was"  the  ono  who  was  most 
concerned  at  this,  went  up  to  the  wall,  and  striking  it  with 
the  palm  of  his  hand  (and  this  he  did  not  without  hurting 
himself),  said,  ‘*I  should  like  to  know  if  the  women 
pedlers  of  Lisbon  will  say  that  Francisco  Pereira  was  in 
this  affair'L  Afonso  Dalboquerquo  reproved  him,  saying  he 
was  astoni shod  that  ho  could  do  such  a thing  at  so  inoppor- 
tune a moment.  And  Francisco  Pereira,  as  he  was  a pas- 
sionate man  and  of  irritable  nature,  began  to  exchange  angry 
words  with  Afonso  Dalboquerque,  and  the  strife  wvnt  so  as 
for  him  to  say,  Why  do  you  pick  quarrels  with  mo,und  not 
with  Duarte  de  Lemos,  because  ho  showed  you  his  teeth,  I 
suppose?^'  To  this  Afonso  Dalboquerque  replied  wdth  groat 
forbearance,  for  in  all  his  dealings  ho  was  always  a pattern 
of  patience,  ^'He  may  well  shew  thorn,  for  he  has  very  largo 
and  very  long  ones'^;'  and  without  saying  another  word  he 
turned  his  back  upon  him,  for  but  a few  days  before,  when 
they  weJre  at  high  words,  Afonso  Dalboquerque  had  borne 
with  Francisco'  Pereira  and  omitted  to  punish  him,  and 
said  to  him  on  that  occasion,  vow  by  my  life,  Francisco 
Pereira,  I am  so  angry  that  I could  tear  myself, and  then 
he  took  hold  of  a slashed  scarlet  cloak  which  he  was  wearing, 
and  tore  it. 

D.  Garcia  de  Noronha,  with  all  the  rest  of  the  forces  who 
were  posted  on  the  right  hand  side,  owing  to  the  un- 
manageableness  and  kicking  .of  the  horses  which  the  Turks 
had  abandoned  in  order  to  save  themselves  on  tho  top  of  the 
wall,  fell  into  such  confusion  that  the  enemy  prevented  them 

This  to  vol.  ii,  p.  242,  where  the  unusual  length  of  Duarte  de 
Leivos*  teeth  is  mentioned. 


228 


COMMEKTARIES  Of 


from  getting  to  the  wall  or  to  the  gate,  and  had  enough  to 
do  as  it  was  to  defend  themselves ; but  the  l^urks  also, 
before  they  could  get  up  on  the  wall,  were  severely  handled 
by  our  men,  who  killed  many  of  them.  And  in  this  hurried 
action,  in  which  all  were  engaged  in  pursuit  of  the  Turks, 
Ro9alcao  thought  he  was  entirely  overthrown  and  the  fortress 
entered  j and,  indeed,  there  would  not  have  been  much  doubt 
of  this  if  our  men  had  only  been  prepared  for  such  an  event. 

Afonso  Dalboquerque,  ^ith  his  body  of  men  who  were  on 
the  left  wing,  began  to  assault  a bulwark  where  Miliqueaye,^ 
the  second  captain,  was  posted  with  a large  body  of  men, 
and  defending  it  with  great  bravery;  notwithstanding  this, 
our  men  were  confident  that  they  could  have  prevailed  over 
the  enemy  in  such  a manner  as  to  get  upon  it  so  that  Afonso 
Dalboquerque  could  have  easily  placed  his  flag  upon  the 
wall  at  that  place  if  he  had  had  any  hope  of  being  supported 
on  the  other  sides;  but,  as  Benestarij  was  a very  large 
town,  and  he  had  not  any  artillery  at  hand  with  which  he 
could  make  a breach  in  the  wall,  he  ordered  the  men  to 
retire.  And,  although  our  soldiers  on  that  day  did  not  do 
more  than  what  I have  related,  it  is  well  worthy  of  praise 
that  so  many  cavaliers  and  noble  people,  loaded  with  heavy 
arms  and  during  the  intense  heat,  should  march  from  Goa 
to  Benestarij,  a distance  of  two  leagues,  on  foot,  and  succeed 
in  laying  hands  on  the  wall,  and  with  so  much  Courage 
have  it  in  their  power  to  enter  into  a fortress  in  which  were 
stationed  so  many  Turks,  who  knew  very  well  how  to  de- 
fend it.  o 

In  this  engagement  they  wounded  Manuel  de  Lacerda, 
Pero  Dalboquerque,  Jorge  da  Silva,  |jopo  Yaz  de  Sampayo, 
Buy  Galvao,  Pero  Correa,  JoSlo  Delgado,  Ruy  Gonqalvez, 
captain  of  the  trainbands,  Diogo  Fernandez  de  B^ja,  Manuel 
de  Sousa,  Jeronymo  de  Sousa,  and  many  others  of  noble 

. * Miliqueaye ; perhaps  for  Mekk  Vahya^  the  second  word*biing  eqaiir> 
valent  to  John,  ^ 


AfONSO  DALBOQUKRQUli. 


229 


degree  who  had  accompanied  their  captains  and  fonght  very 
valiantly,  not  fearing  the  fire  nor  the  powder-cans,  mnstets, 
lances,  arrows,  and  stones  with  which  they  had  to  contend. 
And  besides  these  above-mentioned,  we  had  a list  of  wounded 
amounting  to  a hundred  and  fifty  soldiers  who  served  with 
the  artillery,  for  they  were  posted  close  to  the  foot  of  the 
wall.  Biic  this  was  not  without  its  reward,  for  of  the  Turks 
there  wore  a great  man^r  killed  and  wounded  before  they 
could  retire  into  the  fortress;  and  of  the  peons  who  were 
left  outside  when  the  gate  was  closed  there  were  many 
killed,  as  well  as  two  Hindoo  captains,  one  called  Mirallo,^ 
the  other  Conaique.*^ 


CHAPTER  XLIX. 

How  the  groat  Afonso  Dalboquorquo  rallied  his  people,  and  wont  back 
to  the  city;  and  how  he  returned  again  with  all  his  bultlo  array  lo 
beeiege  the  fortress,  and  of  what  passed  with  llo(;alcuo. 

When  our  forces  had  withdrawn  from  the  foot  of  the  wall, 
the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  drew  up  in  front  of  the  fort- 
ress, in  a spot  where  none  of  the  enemy’s  guns  could  reach  him, 
and  stood  there  a long  space  of  time  with  all  the  captains, 
Fidahjoes,  and  C’avaliers,  surveying  the  manuf'r  of  action 
which' ought  to  bo  carried  out  in  order  to  bo  able  to  got  in  ; 
and  when  all  had  been  carefully  examined  he  set  off  for  tlio  city 
with  the'whole  army,  and  there  he  remained  for  scvcrnl  <lays 
attending  to  the  wounded  and  resting  the  unli.irmorl  from  the 
labours  which  they  had  gone  through  on  that  day.  And  ho 
gave  orders  for  the  im^nediato  preparation  of  all  the  artillery, 

* Miralk;  probably  for  Mir  AH,  a title  and*  name  frequently  ndoptal 
by  the  desceiidants  of  the  Prophet,  through  tho  Kbalif  AH,  his  son-in- 

law. 

■'  * Conaiqite;  I am  unable  to  suggest  the  probable  e<pii valent  of  this 
name. 


230 


COMMEKTA&Ifi8  OF 


Healing  ladders^  hancos  pinchados,^  mantlets,  empty  barrels 
for  tbe  stockades,  and  everything  else  that  could  be  col- 
lected in  the  city  for  such  an  enterprise ; and  when  all  was 
in  order  and  on  the  route,  after  a lapse  of  two  days  he 
ordered  the  trainbands  to  sally  out,  with  all  the  crossbow- 
men and  musketeers,  ;to  convoy  these  munitions  and  wait 
for  him  at  the  Ttoo  Trees  (which  is  the  half-way  mark  from 
Goa  to  Benestarij),  and  there  they  were  to  pitch  his  tent; 
and  on  the  following- day,  in  the  morning,  he  set  out  with 
the  whole  of  the  army,  to  the  number  of  about  three  thou- 
sand five  hundred  men;  and  when  they  had  reached  the 
Two  Trees j he  pitched  his  camp,  surrounded  pn  ^11  sides  by 
artillery,  and  there  he  stayed  for  two  days  waiting  for  the 
supplies  of  which  he  had  given  charge  to  Baatiam  Rodri- 
guez, his  dependent,  who  is  now  Warden  of  the  Balance  at 
the  Mint  of  this  city  of  Lisbon.  And  when  ho  had  arrived, 
Afonso  Dalboquerque  put  himself  on  the  march  with  all  his 
array  in  throe  companies,  and  ordered  Pero  Mascarenhas 
to  lead  the  trainbands  in  the  vanguard  with  all  the  artillery, 
and  erect  some  stockades  in  which  he  could  plant  the  guns. 

As  soon  as  our  men  came  in  sight  of  the  fortress  the 
Turks  commenced  to  fire  at  them,  and  Afonso  Dalboquerque, 
in  order  to  pay  them  out  in  their  own  coin,  ordered  Pero 
Mascarenhas  to  fire  at  them  in  like  manner.  But  when  our 
artillery  began  to  play,  the  Turks,  who  showed  thettoselves 
on  the  top  of  the  wall,  withdrew  inside.  Thus  having 
cleared  the  wall,  Afonso  Dalboquerque  dismounted  from  the 
young  maro  which  he  rode  and  made  his  way  on  foot  to 
the  spot  in  which  Pero  Mascarenhas  had  imparked  his 
artillery,  and  as  night  fell  he  ordered  it  to  be  advanced 
more  towards  the  fortress,  in  front  of  a certain  place  which 
Jofto  Machado  h^d  pointed  out  to  him  as  having  the  wall 
weaker  there  than  elsewhere,  for  his  intention  was  to  throw 
down  a portion  of  it  so  as  to  be  able  to  send  into  tbe  breaclj 
» See  p.  216,  n.  8. 


AFONSO  DALBOQDERQUB. 


231 


a strong  storming  party  whom  the  Turks  could  not  with- 
stand. Arid  on  that  day  which  they  arrived  they  dia'  no 
more  than  pitch  their  camp  all  round  about  the  fortress,  and 
on  the  morning  of  the  following  day  Afonso  Dalboquerque 
returned  and  placed  himself  in  a spot  where  his  back  was 
against  a rock  to  see  what  our  men  were  doing. 

The  Turks,  who  felt  their  pride  wounded  by  Afonso 
Dalboquerque's  being  able  to  stop  there,  began  to  train 
their  guns  towards  that  part  more  frequently,  and  at  this 
juncture  Diogo  Mendez  de  Vasconcelos  came  up;  but  when 
he  perceived  how  unsafe  it  was  to  remain  in  that  situation, 
and  how  contipuously  the  balls  were  coming  against  them, 
he  begged  Afonso  Dalboquerque  to  step  behind  the  rock, 
for  in  the  place  where  he  then  stood  he  ran  great  risk  of 
being  hit ; and  although  Diogo  Mendez  and  Afonso  Dalbo- 
querque were  not  on  very  friendly  terras,  yet  the  latter  did 
as  he  was  advised,  and  just  as  they  were  going  behind  the 
rock  a ball  came  and  killed  a man  who  was  conversing  with 
him,  and  he  was  covered  with  blood.  Afonso  Dalboquerque 
gave  many  thanks  to  our  Lord  that  he  had  saved  him  from 
that  peril,  and  ordered  that  the  ball  should  be  preserved 
and  be  plated  with  silver  and  taken  caro  of  against  his 
funerab  obsequies,  and  carried  to  Our  Lady  of  Guadelupe^ 
with  a very  large  lamp  of  silver  and  a collar  of  gold  set  with 
very  rich  stones,  and  ho  contributed  a hundred  thousand  reia 
in  cash  to  be  invested  for  the  purchase  of  the  supply  of  oil 
for  the  lamp,  and  all  this  was  performed  by  Pero  Correa, 
who  became  his  executor. 

When  this  incident  was  over,  Afonso  Dalboquerque  com- 
manded D.  Garcia  de  Noronha  to  push  forward  his  stockades 
nearer  to  the  wall  during  the  night,  for  ho  was  somewhat 
too  far  off;  and  he  set  to  work  about  this  with  such  dili- 
gence that  before  morning  broke  he  had  made  a stockade 
qf  greater  strength  than  the  original  one,  with  a number 

. ‘ A church  in  the  Dland  of  (hw,  to  the  RO\ith  of  the  town. 


232 


COMMENTAEIHB  OF 


of  barrels  and  baskets  full  of  earthy  and  all  the  artillery 
arran^ifed  in  their  proper  positions,  and  Afonso  Dalooquerque 
was  on  his  mare  all  the  night  long  seeing  after  the  progress 
of  the  work.  And  at  daybreak,  when  Rot^alcfto  beheld  our 
^ stockade  brought  much  nearer  to  his  fortress,  he  made 
ready  four  hundred  Tu,rks  and  ordered  them  to  assault  it. 

Pero  Mascarenhas,  Huy  Gon^alvez,  and  Jofto  Fidalgo,  who 
were  in  command  of  the  trainbands  stationed  in  a hollow,  in 
order  to  be  out  of  the  raqge  of  the  Turkish  artillery,  came 
up  at  once  on  hearing  the  alarm  of  the  attack,  and  Dorn 
Garcia  do  Noronha  came  up  on  the  other  side  and  fell  upon 
this  party  with  such  impetuosity  that  before  *the  Turks 
could  withdraw  a number  of  them  were  left  stretched  upon 
the  held.  As  soon  as  the  Turks  had  retired  our  artillery 
began  to  play  upon  the  wall  with  such  fury  from  the  morn- 
ing until  the  evening  that  there  was  not  a single  Moor  who 
dared  to  shew  himself  between  the  battlements. 

And  because  we  had  in  our  camp  some  very  powerful 
guns,  and  the  gunners  were  very  skilful  at  their  work,  they 
began  to  breach  the  wall  in  several  places.  So  when  Afonso 
Dalboquerque  saw  the  state  of  the  walls,  he  gave  orders  to 
the  captains  to  hold  themselves  in  readiness  to  assault  the 
fortress  oti  the  morrow  in  the  morning,  and  take  the  Turks 
by  force  of  arms ; but  he  said  he  would  not’  appoint  them 
the  place,  only  that  every  one  was  to  be  on  the  alert,  and 
where  they  saw  him  thither  everyone  was  to  repair ; and  he 
also  ordered  the  gunners  to  approach  yet  neareif  to  the 
fortress  with  the  guns.  Ro^alcfto,  finding  himself  pressed 
so  hardly  on  the  sea  side,  as  well  as  on  the  land,  and  having 
no  hope  of  any  relief,  sent  for  Miliqiteaye — the  second 
captain,  who  was  a native  Coraejono — and  all  the  principal 
Turks  of  the  fortress?  and  made  them  a speech,  in  which  he 
declared  that  they  could  well  see  for  themselves  how  closely 
they  were  besieged,  and  cut  off  from  all  sucoowr?  and  & 
great  portion  of  the  wall  thrown  down,  and  how  greatjy 


AFONSO  DALBOQUFRQUE. 


233 


they  were  in  want  in  supplies  and  gunpowder,  and  all  other 
munitions  needful  for  its  defence,  and  how  slender  were  the 
chances  they  had  of  being  freshly  supplied  with  them 
therefore,  as  they  could  no  longer  hold  out  successfully  by 
their  arms,  they  ought  to  secure  themselves  by  some 
arrangements  of  peace,  which  they  must  make  with  the 
Christians. 

Miliqueaye  and  tho  ot^her  Turks,  after  considering  the 
arguments  of  Eo(^aloao,  and  drawing* a lesson  from  their 
recent  experiences,  came  to  the  conclusion  that  ho  ought  to 
beg  for  truce,  with  the  intention  of  afterwards  treating  for 
an  agreement  ypon  terms  of  peace.  And  as  soon  as  they 
had  been  agreed  upon,  early  in  the  morning  of  the  following 
day,  Afonso  Dalboquerque  still  adhering  to  his  intention  of 
storming  the  fortress,  they  hung  out  a white  flag  on  the 
wall ; and  when  he  caught  sight  of  it,  he  sent  Jo&o  Machado 
immediately  to  speak  with  Ho^alcilo  and  learn  what  he 
wanted ; and  JoHo  Machado  went  to  the  foot  of  tho  wall, 
and  Eogalc^o  came  down  and  conversed  with  liim,  and  told 
him  to  say  to  tho  captain  general  that  ho  must  give  him  a 
safe  conduct,  for  he  would  perform  whatever  was  demanded 
of  him.  Tiien  Afonso  Dalboquerque,  who  thought  it  more 
important  a matter  to  preserve  the  life  of  a single  Christian 
whom  he  imperilled  in  tho  fight  than  to  encompass  the 
death  of  the  whole  of  tho  Tuiks  who  were  in  the  fortress, 
was  very  pleased,  and  sent  word  to  Ro(^aIcfto  that  he  must 
hand  over  to  him  two  of  the  principal  men  of  the  Turks  as 
hostages,  and  then  ho  would  send  him  a statememt  of  what 
he  would  have  him  do.  Jofto  Machado  returned  with  the 
message,  and  as  llo<^alcao  was  anxious  to  make  peace,  he 
lost  no  time  in  sending  him  back  again  with  tho  Turks  who 
had  been  demanded. 


234 


C0MMBNTAB1B8  01 


CHAPTER  L. 

Of  how  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  debated  with  the  Captaini  and 
Fidalgoea  who  were  there  the  terms  offered  by  Ro(;alcio ; and  of 
the  agreement  which  was  made ; and  how  he  set  out  for  Goa. 

No  sooner  had  Jofto  Machado  returned  with  the  two 
Turks  who  wore  to  remain  as  hostages  until  the  conclusion 
of  the  negotiations  fer  a ^reaty  of  peace,  for  which  Ro^alcfto 
sued,  as  I have  related,  than  Afonso  Dalboquerque  sum- 
moned all  his  captains  and  Fidalgoes  who  were  in  that  camp, 
and  shewed  them  how  the  Turks  of  the  fortress  of  Bonestarij 
were  already  on  the  point  of  surrender,  for  Ro(^alcfto,  the 
principal  Captain,  had  sent  to  discuss  terms  of  peace,  and 
had  promised  to  do  whatever  was  required  of  him,  therefore 
it  was  necessary  that  all  should  declare  to  him  their  opinions, 
in  order  that  he  might  send  the  reply  to  this  the  request  of 
the  enemy. 

The  reply  of  the  captains  was  that  they  had  offered  them- 
selves there  at  great  risk  of  their  lives,  willing  to  suffer 
death  for  the  service  of  God,  and  of  the  King  Dom  Manuel; 
and  as  they  had  so  large  an  army  there,  with  such  a high 
spirit  of  victory,  he  ought  not  to  entertain  the  proposals 
made  by  Rocjalcfto,  but  storm  the  fortress  ..nd  enter  it  by 
force  of  arms,  and  get  Ro^alcfto  into  his  power ; for  that  the 
enemy  should  sue  for  peace,  while  all  tho  time  ho  had  with 
him  in  the  fortress  twice  as  large  an  army  of  Turks  as  there 
was  of  Christians  outside  it,  was  really  because  his  condi- 
tion was  far  more  desperate  than  they  all  had  any  idea  of, 
and  therefore  for  these  reasons,  and  for  many  others,  they 
were  of  opinion  that  he  ought  not  to  enter  into  any  treaty 
with  him.  " 

But  inasmuch  as  Afonso  Dalboquerque  and  D.  Garcia, 
and  others,  were  of  the  opposite  opinion,  he  replied  to  theap 
arguments  that  the  best  things  the  Turks  had  in  tho  fortrpss 


AFOKSO  DALBOQUSRQUE. 


235 


were  the  artillery  and  the  horses,  for  as  for  the  men,  even 
if  he  took  them  all  prisoners  be  would  not  give  twopehoe 
for  the  whole' of  them,  and  he  certainly  would  never  allow 
them  to  set  foot  inside  the  city,  for  there,  was  a great 
scarcity  of  provisions  there;  and  if  they  thought  that  by 
giving  them  battle  they  would  take  Ro9alcao  prisoner,  as 
they  alleged,  it  was  very  doubtful  whether  they  could  do  so 
or  not,  and  it  would  very  Jikely  cost  them  the  lives  of  four 
or  five  Fidahjoes,  or  perhaps  even  twenty,  seeing  that  every 
one  was  anxious  to  be  the  first  in ; for  eight  thousand  Moors, 
surrounded,  and  cut  off,  without  any  hope  of  relief,  would 
of  necessity  spill  much  of  their  assailants^  blood  before 
they  could  be  quite  beaten  down ; and  therefore  it  was  his 
opinion  and  firm  resolve,  that  if  Roqalcao  would  suiTender 
him  the  fortress  with  all  its  artillery  and  the  horses,  and 
everything  else  that  it  contained,  and  deliver  up  to  him 
the  renegades,  then  he  would  let  them  go,  even  if  he  had  to 
build  them  a bridge  of  silver  to  enable  thorn  to  pass  over  to 
the  mainland. 

Having  settled  this,  Afonso  Dalboquerque  sent  word  to 
Roqakao,  through  Jofto  Machado,  that,  provided  he  agreed 
to  the  conditions  which  I have  related,  ho  would  make 
peace  with  him,  and  let  him  go  freely  away;  but  if  he 
would  not  accept  these  terms,  then  ho  must  know  of  a 
certainty'  that  he  would  not  spare  his  life,  nor  the  life  of  a 
single  person  who  was  left  in  the  fortress.  And  as  Roqalcao 
was  very, desirous  of  peace,  he  agreed  to  every'  condition ; 
but  for  the  renegade  Christians,  who  were  in  his  host, 
he  begged  Afonso  Dalboquerque  not  to  make  any  special 
demand  for  them,  for  ho  could  not  surrender  them,  seeing 
that  it  would  be  contrary  to  the  law  of  the  country. 

To  this  Afonso  Dalboquerque  replied  that  the  principal 
point  of  all  which  he  required  to  be  conceded  was  the  sur- 
render  of  ^he  renegades,  and  unless  this  were  adhered  to 
he  would  not  listen  to  any  further  proposals;  Roqalcfto  there- 


236 


COMMENTAEIES  OF 


fore,  perceiving  how  determined  he  was,  and  being  very 
desirous  of  feeling  himself  free  and  out  of  the  toils  in  which 
ho  was  involved,  desired  rather  to  ameliorate  the  necessity 
of  his  condition  tlian  comply  with  the  obligations  of  his 
law;  so  ho  told  JoAo  Machado  to  declare  to  the  great 
Captain  that  as  he  made  so  great  a matter  of  the  renegades 
he  would  surrender  thorn  on  the  condition  that  Afonso 
Dalboquerque  would  spare  their  lives. 

This  Afonso  Dalboquerque  granted,  and  sent  back  a safe 
conduct  for  him  and  for  all  the  Turks  and  Moors,  provided 
that  they  cai’ricd  away  nothing  with  them  except  only  the 
clothing  in  which  they  stood  up.  And  as  i^on  as  Hoqalcao 
received  the  safe  conduct,  ho  lost  no  time  in  sending  his 
wives  over  to  the  mainland  ; and  when  they  were  all  over  on 
the  other  side,  he  and  ^flliquoaye  (who  was  the  second  in 
command  of  the  fortress^,  fearing  lest  Afonso  Dalboquerque 
should  violate  his  safe  conduct,  crossed  over  immediately, 
forgetting  all  about  the  promises  wl)ich  they  had  made  to 
the  Turks  that  they  would  not  quit  the  fortress  without,  first 
of  all,  seeing  them  safely  out  of  it. 


CHAPTER  LI. 

How  our  iru-n  entered  the  fortress*  and  wanted  to  pillage  the  •Turks,  if 
the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  had  not  prevented  them ; and  what 
passed  with  the  renegadee,  and  how  he  set  forth  towar^jj  Goa. 

As  soon  as  the  news  ran  through  the  camp  that  ilopa]** 
efto  and  Miliqoeaye  had  crossed  over  to  the  mainland, 
our  people,  eager  to  sack  the  fortress,  came  on  in  a con- 
fused mass  and  got  inside  it,  and  began  to  pillage  it,  and 
illtreat  the  Turks,  ^ahy  of  whom,  out  of  fear,  cast  them* 
selves  into  the  river  and  were  drowned.  But  when  Afonso 
Dalboquerque  perceived  this  disturbance  he  went  tip  to  the 
gate  to  hinder  the  people  from  going  in  until  it  was  com- 


AFONSO  OALBOQUBRQUE. 


237 


pletely  evacuated  by  the  Turks;  nevertheless,  after  he  got 
to  the  gate  he  was  compelled  to  go  in,  in  order  to  adhbre 
to  the  pledge  of  safety  which  he  had  given  them,  and 
only  with  great  difficulty  could  ho  prevent  9ur  men  from 
killing  and  robbing  them. 

And  as  the  Moors  were  very  numerous,  and  there  were 
no  means  of  passing  them  on  to  the  mainland  so  expedi* 
tiously  as  Afonso  Dalboquerque  desired,  in  order  to  make 
an  end  of  this  business  of  casting  then)  out,  he  ordered  the 
boats  belonging  to  the  ships  to  be  brought  up,  along  with 
some  watchboats  which  he  had  there,  and  by  those  means 
he  began  gji^adually  to  reduce  the  numbers  of  people  who 
stood  on  the  shore.  Notwithstanding  this,  so  numerous  were 
the  Persians,  Turks,  Coracones,  and  other  people  of  the 
country,  that  they  took  two  days  in  ])a8sing  over,  And  it 
fell  out  that  on  the  very  next  day  in  the  morning  after 
all  had  passed  over  to  the  other  side  of  the  mainland, 
I^ufularij,  Captain  of  the  Hidn-lcao,  arrived  to  relieve  Ko- 
(jalcfto  with  a great  body  of  men  and  a large  quantity  of 
supplies ; but  inasmuch  as  Benestarij  was  by  this  time  sur- 
rounded, both  by  land  and  sea  by  our  men,  it  was  perfectly 
impossible  for  them  to  get  in,  and  I^ufularij,  when  he  saw 
the  fortress  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  and  no  help  for  it, 
returned  with  the  army  which  he  had  brought  back  again  to 
hie  own  lands,  very  much  discouraged,  and  throwing  great 
blame  upon  Ro^alciio  for  surrendering  a fortress  which  con- 
^ tained  ao^many  people  for  its  defence.. 

Thq  Turks,  too,  feeling  themselves  safe,  waited  for  nothing 
else,  bui  went  away  immediately  under  their  Captains,  with 
a large  number  of  whites,  into  the  interior  country.  And 
as  soon  as  the  fortress  was  entirely  clear  of  the  enemy, 
Afonso  Dalboquerque  gave  orders  that  all  the  horses  and 
artillery  which  it  contained  should  be  collected  together, 
and  the » dilapidations  of  the  fortress  be  repaired  in  the 
strongest  manner  that  was  possible,  and  replenished  with 


288 


COMMBNTAHtES  OV 


more  artillery  and  munitions  of  war,  and  he  apjfointed  a 
caj^in  with  a rotinuG  of  soldiers  to  guard  it.'  And  after  he 
had  completed  liis!  provision  of  these  matters  he  com* 
manded  them. to  bring  up  before  him  Fernfto  Lopez  and  the 
other  renegades ; these  men,  when  they  found  themselves 
in  his  presence,  fearipg  that  ho  would  not  keep  the  promise 
he  had  made  them  of  sparing  their  lives,  threw  themselves 
at  his  feet,  and  with  many  tears  besought  him  to  have 
mercy  cn  thorn.  But  Afonso  Dalboquerque,  who  could 
not  break  his  word,  kept  the  promise  which  he  had  made  of 
not  taking  their  lives,  according  to  the  promise  given  to 
Ro^alcilo,  so  he  ordered  that  their  riglit  hards,  and  the 
thumbs  of  their  left  hands,  and  their  ears  and  noses  should 
bo  cut  off  in  memory  and  as  a terrible  example  of  the 
punishment  meted  out  to  them  for  the  treason  and  wicked- 
ness which  they  had  committed  against  God  and  their  king.* 

* The  fort  of  Benastarim  became  very  famoiw  in  the  annals  of  Goa 
after  the  Portuguese  conquest.  Pietro  della  Valle  makes  especial  men- 
tion of  it,  as  also  the  house  in  which  the  commandant  of  the  fort  then 
resided,  from  the  balcony  of  which  a splendid  view  of  the  surrounding 
country  could  be  enjoyed.  In  this  fortress  there  was  a very  large  gun 
which  had  been  taken  from  the  Mahaminadans,  and  which  was,  until 

lately,  preserved  as  an  historical  reminiscence. J.  N.  da  Fonseca^  Sketch 

of  Goa,  Bombay,  1878,  p.  153. 

* CasUmheda,  in  his  account  of  this  horrible  cruelty  (a  foreshadowing 
perhaps  of  the  tortures  invented  by  the  Inquisition  at  G(^dn  later 
years),  attaches  even  more  horrid  details  to  this  great  blot  upon  the 
otherwise  magnanimous  character  of  Afonso  Dalboquerque.  He  says  , 
that  the  hair  of  the  wretched  men’s  heads  and  beards  was  forn  out  by 
the  roots,  ami  the  raw  places  smeared  with  mud.  He  adds  seme  in- 
teresting information  respecting  the  life  of  Fern&o  Lopez,  whom  he  him- 
self saw  In  the  island  of  St.  Helena.  The  passage  is  as  follows 

ho  principal  que  ho  moueo  a fazer  isto,  foy  por  ser  exemplo  a 
outros  que  nio  fizeesem  outro  ta^to,  e tambem  por  nfto  ficar  sem 
castigo  hum  crime  tamaBho  Como  aquelle  foy.  £ a justi^  foy  com  Ihes 
mandar  pubricamente  e com  pregAo  cortar  narizes,  orelhas,  mAos  dereytas, 
dedos  das  ezquerdas,  e entregalos  aos  mo^os  que  Ihes  depenassem  os 
cabeloB  das  barbas  o das  oabe^as,  e que  os  enlameassem,  e ifljuriassem/e 
a FemAo  Lopez  sobre  todos  porque*era  de  mail  qualidade:  e por  dgrra- 


ilVONSO  DILBOQUIBQUS. 


289 


This'Fern&o  Lopez,  who  was  the  ringleader  of  the  rene- 
gades, set  out  on  his  return  to  Portugal  after  the  death  of 
Afonso  Dalboquerque,  but  when  he  had  got  so  far  forward 
on  the  voyage  as  the  Island  of  Saint  Ilena,  h^  made  up  his 
mind  to  stay  there  with  a slave  who  belonged  to  him,  and 
there  he  ended  bis  days.  |lo  was  jbhe  first  who  made  a 
habitation  in  this  island,  establishing  a Hermitage,  and 
planting  many  trees,  and  jie  bred  a great  number  of  hogs 
and  goats,  so  that  the  site  became  a very  commodious  place 

deiro  foy  degradado  pera  Portugal,  e eu  ho  vi  na  ilha  de  santa  Helena, 
onde  por  aeu  rogo  ho  capitao  da  nao  quo  ho  leuaua  ho  deixou  sb;  e ali 
viuoo  muyto  thmjt),  aeruiudo  a nosso  aeflor  arrependido  do  peccado  que 
tizera.  E disaeratume  que  assi  ele  como  muytoa  doa  outros  sofrerio  eetea 
tormentoa  com  muyta  paciencia  dizendo  que  mais  mereciac>  polo  graue 
peccado  que  cometerao.” — Castanheday  lib.  iii,  ch.  xciii. 

Correa  gives  even  a more  revolting  account  of  this  pimishment,  which 
was  spread  out  over  three  days,  and  resulted  in  the  death  of  more  than 
half  the  number  of  the  victims.  He  says ; — “ Depois  de  os  mouros  serem 
deitados  f<5ra  da  ilha  do  Goa,  o Gouernador  prouco  e afortelezou  oe 
passos  da  ilha,  como  dito  he.  Logo  entendeo  com  os  arrenegados  que 
estau&o  com  o Ro9alcdo,  os  quaes,  com  bara^OK  nos  pesco^os  e mSos 
atadas  detiis,  forio  leuados  & picota  fdra  da  cidade,  com  pregSo  que 
dizia;  ‘ Justi9a  que  inanda  fazer  ElRey  nosso  senhor,  que  manda  bas- 
camar  estes  homens,  porque  forio  trbdores  a sua  ley  e a seu  Rey;  e a 
morte  Ihes  he  perdoada  por  amor  do  Hidalcao.’  K chegados  i picota 
negros  afgozes  e mo908  do  pouo  Ihe  depennarao  e arraucarSo  quantas 
barbas  tinh^o,  at^  as  sobrancelbas,  e Ibe  tirargo  com  lama  fedoreuta  de 
chiqueicos'de  porcx^s,  que  pera  ysso  estaua  prestes,  aos  rostros  e olhos, 
onde  os  fizer&o  taes  que  Ihe  nom  pareciio  os  rostros ; com  que  forfio 
tornados  k pris&o,  em  que  jaziao  deitados  com  correntes  de  ferro  nos  pte 
e pesoo^os,  e algemas  nas  mAos,  e assy  como  jaziAo  mijauSo  e sayflo  por 
gy.  EoUo  ao  outro  dia,  assy  d’  esta  maneyra  como  estauad,  os  tornario 
a leuar  i picota  com  o mesmo  pregdo,  onde  Ihe  cortarao  as  orelhas  rentes 
e os  narizes,  e os  tornarso  i prisio,  onde  os  metemo  como  estau^  assy 
naa  correntes  de  ferro  sem  st  rem  curados.  E ao  outrt)  dia  assy  os  leuarao 
i picota  com  seu  pregao,  onde  Ihe,  cortarao  as  maos  direitos  e os  dedos 
polegares  das  esquerdas ; com  que  forao  toriiadod  k prisao,  e forfto  curados 
de  suas  chagas.  De  que  na  prisfto  morrerao  mais  d’  ainetade  delles,  e oe 
que  ficarftq  forlo  soltos,  qus  Uuremente  se  fossem  por  onde  quigeesem  ? o 
assy  flierfio,  que  todos  desappare^eiio.”— Correo,  pp.  316,  816. 


240 


COKMENTAKIES  OF 


of  shelter  for  our  ships  which  touched  there  on  the  home- 
ward voyage  from  India.^ 

* Correa's  account  of  this  unfortunate  man,  whose  aclventurea  are 
worthy  of  recorn  here  because  he  is  Iwlieved  to  have  been  the  first 
eettler  upon  the  island  of  St.  Helena,  is  as  follows : — 

“ FeruSo  Lopes  se  metco  em  huma  nao  do  Reyno,  qua  em  Lisboa 
tinha  molhor  e filhoa,  a qual  nao  foy  apartar  na  ilha  de  S.  Elena,  onde 
tomarao  agoa ; onde  este  Fernao  Lo^X's  fiqou  escondido,  o qual  achado 
menos  na  nao  o forilo  buscar,  e o nom  adhaudo  Ihe  deixarSo  hum  quarto 
cheo  de  biscoito,  e taasalhos  ,de  came,  o pexe  soquo,  e sal,  o fogo,  e 
roupaa  volhas  que  cada  hum  deu  ; c a nao  se  jArtio,  e Ihe  deixarAo 
huma  carta  que  vindo  ally  t^r  algiinia  nao  desse  sinaee  de  sy  se  era 
morto  ou  viuo,  e se  mostrasse  pera  o prouerem  do  que  ouvesae  mester ; e 
a nao  se  partio,  Fernuo  Lopes,  vendo  a nao  partidH,  sAyo  do  mate  e 
tomou  0 que  achuu,  o acendeo  o fogo  que  se  nom  apagasse,  e logo  buscott 
pedras,  quo  bateo  humas  com  outraa,  e vio  (pie  feiiao  fogo,  e as  guardou. 
Assy  com  os  quutro  <iedo«  da  mSo  <?8<pierda,  e com  o cotinho  da  direita 
que  tinha  cortuda,  coino  Doos  Ihc  ministrana  por  sua  grande  iriiseric<:»r- 
dia,  canou  em  huma  ribanceira,  em  que  fez  huma  lapa,  que  dentro  fez 
grande,  ora  que  se  rcccHua  e dormia,  o a boca  da  lapa  tapaua  com  tojos, 
Achou  heruas  tenras,  que  erao  gostosas  de  comer,  que  cozia  com  sal  em 
duas  panellas  quo  Ihe  deixardo.  Assy  cstando,  o outro  anno  foy  hy  ter 
huma  nao,  e die  vendo  vir  a nao  so  escondeo. 

Os  da  nao,  sayndo  em  terra  que  acharao  a lapa,  e cama  de  palha  era 
que  dormia,  e os  aacos,  e tvs  diiellas  do  quarto  em  que  Ihe  deixarSo  o 
biftcoito,  e as  panellas,  e os  canioes  do  fogo,  ficarSo  espantados,  e crerdo 
que  erao  negros  que  ficariao  ally  fdgidos  d’outra  nao;  mas  vendo  o fato 
nssontarao  que  era  homem  portuguez,  'J’omardo  sua  agoa,  nora  l)olirfto  ora 
nada,  antes  Ihe  deixarfio  biscoito,  e queijos,  e cousaa  ^io  comer,  e huma 
carta  era  que  Ihe  diziaoque  nom  sc  escondease,  quequando  nab  ally  por- 
tasse  fallasse,  que  ninguem  Iho  faria  mal.  E a itao  se  fez  it  vela,  Em 
largando  as  velas  da  nao  cayo  as  mar  hum  galo,  que  as  ondas  trouxer&o  a 
terra,  que  o F.  Lopes  recolheo,  e llio  daua  arroz  que  Ihe  deixarSo,  com 
que  0 galo  liqou  com  elle  em  tal  atnizade  que  sempre  o acomp^nhaua 
onde  andaua,  e de  noite  se  recoihia  com  elle  i coua.  Este  galo  esteue 
com  este  homem  muy  tos  annos,  a que  elle  chamaua ; que  depois  paasando 
a tempo  este  homem  parecia,  e fallaua  ooiu  a genie  das  naos  que  pas^ 
sauilo,  e todos  Ihe  dau&o  cousas  pera  prantar  e semear,  em  que  fex  muy- 
tas  aboboras,  romAs,  paKweiras,  ades,  galiahaa,  porcas,  cabras  prenhes, 
que  tudo  se  fez  em  muyU  cria^ik),  c tudo  se  fez  brauo  do  mato. 

' ' Este  homem  estelie  muytoa  annos  b6  n'eiia  ilha  fazendo  esta  espan- 
tosa  vida,  o que  sendo  dito  a ElRey  deeejou  muyto  de  o vAf,  porque  Ihe 
dizi&o  que  era  como  homem  seluagem ; polo  que  ElKey  o mandou  rqgar 


APONSO  DALBOQtJBRQUE. 


2 it 

Afonso  D^lboquerqne,  after  having  provisioned  the  fort- 
ress with  everything  that  was  requisite  for  it,  made  his  way 
to  the  city  with  all  the  army,  and  there  they  wore  received 
by  the  entire  populace  with  a great  procesPAon  at  the  city 
gate,  and  from  that  gate  they  marched  straight  to  the 
church,  to  return  thanks  to  Our  Lord  for  the  great  victory 
which  he  had  given  them  over  their  enemies  ; and  when  all 
these  ceremonies  were  over,  he  immediately  established  a 
hospital  of  very  large  size,  with  bedii  and  everything  that 
was  necessary  for  the  caro  and  cure  of  the  wounded,  who 
were  very  numerous ; and  he  commanded  Garcia  do  Sousa 
to  take  certain  ships  and  cruise  off  the  bar  of  Dabul,  and  not 
permit  a single  vessel  to  go  into,  or  out  of,  the  port,  with 
the  object  of  making  war  upon  the  llidalcilo  wherever  ho 
was  able  to  prevail  against  him. 

que  por  aua  vontade  fosse  ao  Heyno.  O quo  ello  fez,  e foy,  e escondido 
desembarqou  em  casa  do  capitSo  da  nao,  d'ondo  de  noite  hia  fallar  com 
ElRey,  e a Raynha,  que  Ihe  daiijo  hormedys  e casas  de  frades  em  quo 
estiuefise ; o que  elle  nada  quis  aceitar,  mas  ouve  liceiuja  d’ElUey  o se 
foy  a Roma,  e se  confessou  ao  Papa,  que  folgou  de  o vdr,  e ouve  cartas 
pera  ElRey  que  o tornasse  a maudar  4 ilha.  O quo  assy  o fez  ElRey. 
Esteue  este  bouiem  n'esta  ilha  pa&saut>e  de  dez  annos,  sem  uiuiqua  o 
ningueoi  v^r,  porque  se  elle  escoudia. 

**  N’esta  ilha  fiqou  hum  10090  j4o  fo^do,  que  assy  esteue  com  elle 
iniiytoe  ahnos.  Este  mo^o  foy  o que  o descobrio  a huma  nao  que  liy  foy 
ter,  em  quo  hia  poi  capituo  Poro  Gomez  Teixeira,  que  fOra  ouvidor  geral 
na  India,  que  fez  tantos  medos  as  negro  que  o foy  descobrir  onde  cstaua 
escondido  ; que  vendose  tornado  fez  graudes  prautos,  cuidando  que  o 
querifio  leuar  na  nao;  mas  P.  Gomes  o consolou,  e com  elle  inuyto 
lallou,  e segurou  que  o nom  Icuaria,  e Ihc  deu  muyt-vas  cou^,  postoque 
elle  OR  norn  q ueria  e muy  aficadameute  Ihe  rogou  quo  leuasse  o moyo. 
O Pero  Gomes  0 leuou,  com  F.  I..opes  Ihe  prornetter  que  se  nom  escon- 
deria  4 gente.  O que  assy  concertado  o P.  Gomes  Ihe  deixou  hum  seu 
asainado  cm  que  pedia  por  mvrc4  a toilus  os  capities,  que  ally  chegassoin, 
que  nom  lizesseio  forya  ao  querer  kuar  ao  Keyuo  contra  sua  vontade, 
porque  todos  os  tempos  passatios  que  se  cscondia  era  com  esse  medo  que 
tinha  ; polo  que  Ihe  dera  seguro  em  nonm  d’ElRey,  e Iho  jur4ra,  que 
ninguem  o ienaria  da  ilha  oontia  sua  vontade.  Com  que  o F.  Lopes  fiqou 
sejfuro,  com  ^ue  se  nora  oscondia,  e fallaua  com  todos,  e daua  do  que 
nacia  ntf  ilha,  que  foy  em  muyto  crfccimento : e na  ilha  morreo  depois 
d*aby  a muyto  tempo,  que  foy  no  anno  do  1646.” — Correa^  pp.  Sl6-818. 

VOL.  ni.  ® 


242 


00HVKKTABIB9'  .OF 


As  soon  as  Garcia  de  Sousa  had  set  sail.  Afonso  Palbo- 
querquQ  prepared  a large  supply  of  lime,  stone,  and  masonry^  , 
in  order  to  fortify  the  fortress  of  Benostarij,  and  strengthen 
the  island  passes,  which  had  great  need  of  it;. and  he  re- 
named the  fortress  The  Oastle  of  8t  Peter,  because  of  the 
name  of  the  ship  which,  had  there  been  broken  to  pieces  in 
front  of  it.  And  he  appointed  Manuel  Fragoso  to  the  com- 
mand of  the  outwork  of  Pangij  and  the  tower  of  the  island 
Choi*am ; and  to  Bastiao  Rodriguez,  cavalier  of  the  king*$ 
household  and  the  present  warden  of  the  balance  in  the 
Mint  of  the  city  of  Lisbon,  he  gave  command  of  the  tower 
of  Divarij,  and  because  this  latter  officer  was  a householder 
of  Goa,  he  conferred  also  upon  him  the  office  of  chief  Alcaide 
of  Goa  during  his  life.  And  because  these  passes  were  the 
principal  ones,  and  of  very  great  importance  for  the  security 
of  the  transit  from  the  mainland  to  the  island,  he  made  the 
completion  of  them  a matter  of  great  urgency,  for  his 
real  intention  was  to  penetrate  the  straits  of  the  Red  Sea, 
and  take  Adera,  if  it  were  possible;  but  of  this  enter* 
prise  he  had  given  no  account  to  any  one,  that  his  voyage  . 
thither  might  not  bo  suspected.  Yet,  because  the  time  tif 
the  monsoon  was  now  at  hand,  and  he  had  a jinmbfebf 
matters  which  he  had  to  put  in  order,  before  entering  nppn 
them  he  determined  first  of  all  to  dispatch  the  ambassadors 
of  the  kings  of  India  who  were  awaiting  him  at  Goa. 
Pedro  Mascarenhaa  also,  seeing  that  the  siege  of  Ben|istarij 
was  over,  begged  permission  to  return  to  his  fortress  of  , 
Cochira,  bht  Afonso  Dalboquerque,  anxious  to  leavb  him  in 
office  as  Captain  of  Goa,  out  of  great  confidence  in  his 
courage  and  discretion,  desired  hiip  earnestly  of  his  gob4*^ 
ness  to  be  pleased  to  remain, where  he  was  to  superintend 
the  completion  of  tie  lowers,  for  which,  indeed,  all  things 
wnre  by  this  time  ready  prepared,  for  in  so  doing  he  would 
advance  the  king’s  service  much  more  than  by^l^tnniieg 
to.  and  staying  in,  Cochim.  * 


AFONSO  DAtBOQDERQUK. 


243 


CHAPTER  hlL 

Hof  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  sent  D.  Gaibia  de  Noronha,  his 
' nephew,  with  a fleet  against  Calicut ; and  how  he  dispatchefl  the 
ambassadors  who  were  waiting  for  him  at  Goa,  and  the  rest  which 
took  place. 

‘ NoWj  inasmuch  as  the  great  Afonso  Dalboquerque  was 
very  angry  with  the  ^amorim  because  he  had  broken  his 
w6rd,  in  respect  of  the  peace  which  he  (Afonso)  had  sent  by 
ambassadors  to  conclude  while  he  was  on  the  way  to  Malaca, 
in  which  embassage  Similo  Rangel  went ; therefore,  when  the 
proceedings  against  Benestarij  were  finished,  Afonso  Dalbo- 
querque, out  of  a desire  to  be  revenged  on  him,  sent  D. 
Garcia  de  Noronha,  his  nephew,  to  go  up  against  Calicut, 
and  do  as  much  harm  as  he  could  to  the  Qamorim,  and 
blockade  the  coast  in  such  a manner  that  not  a single  ship 
should  leave  the  port  with  spices  for  M^ca.  And,  because 
^ certain  ambassadors  of  the  kings  of  India  had  been  for  a 
lOBg  time  waiting  in  Goa,  as  soon  as  D.  Garcia  had  set  sail, 
^onso  Dalboquerque  occupied  himself  upon  their  dispatches, 
and  ordered  the  secretary  to  lay  before  him  all  the  papers 
and  tetters  of  the  Hidalcfto ; and  when  he  had  examined 
them,  he  sent 'for  the  ambassador  of  this  prince,  and  told 
him  that  if  the  ilidalcfto  desired  to  be  at  peace  and  have 
friendship  with  the  King  of  Portugal,  his  Lord,  he  himself 
would  be  very  much  pleased,  but  the  articles  which  he  had 
brought  were  not  similar  in  their  import  to  those  which  the 
Hidalcao  had  frequently  written  ; and  therefore,  in  order  to 
(jear  up  this  matter,  ho  had  determined  to  send  him  back 
with  an  ambassador  in  compapy  with  him. 

The  ambassador  of  the  Hidalcfto  replied  that  there  was  no 
variation  whatever  in  the  articles ; but  if  he  desired  to  s^nd 
tp  the  H\dalca.o  a messenger  from  the  Portuguese,  and  any 
delays  should  arise  from  this*  circumstance,  he  would  desire 

R 2 


244 


COMMENTARIES  OP 


him  that  tlnnng  the  period  of  time  consumed  in 

arranging  the  articles  of  peace,  he  would  be  pleased  to  com- 
mand his  captains  to  open  the  port  of  Dabul,^  and  give  free 
ingi'oss  to  the  skips  which  were  thither  bound  with  mer- 
chandise and  provisions.  Afonso  Dalboquerqiie  was  so  de- 
sirous of  coining  to  somo  -conclusive  understanding  with  the 
Hidalcao,  that  he  lost  no  time  in  sending  word  to  D.  Garcia 
do  Sousa,  who  was  watching  the  port  of  JDabul,  to  set  free 
the  shipping  of  the  port,  provided  that  no  prohibited  mer- 
chandise were  carried  ; and  if  the  Moors  should  desire  per- 
mission for  a free  navigation  of  their  ships,  they  were  to  be 
sent  to  apply  for  it  at  Goa. 

Having  therefore  dispatched  this  ambassador,  Afonso 
Dalboquerqne  sent,  in  company  with  him,  to  treat  for  peace, 
Diogo  Fernandez,  Adail  of  Goa,  and  the  son  of  Gil  Vicente 
as  his  senvener,  and  Joilo  Navarro  as  his  interpreter,  and 
six  complete  services  of  horses,  and  a native  captain  with 
twenty  peons  to  attend  them  on  the  way.  And  when  Diogo 
Fernandez  Lad  set  out  on  his  journey,  Afonso  Dalboquerquo 
dispatched  the  ambassador  of  the  King  of  Carabaya,  who 
had  been  going  up  and  down  Goa  for  some  time ; but  his 
departure  was  prolonged  as  much  as  possible,  for  as  the 
Portuguese  fleet,  which  was  in  course  of  preparation,  was 
very  large  and  being  prepared  very  carefully  with  every- 
thing that  was  requisite  to  perfoinn  any  undertaking,  how- 
ever important  it  might  be, — although  he  had  not  yet  given 
any  account  to  anyone  of  the  route  he  intended  to  follow, — 
he  was  fearful  lest  the  Moors  should  surmise  that  he  was 
prepanng  to  enter  the  straits  of  the  lied  Sea,  and,  by  the 
medium  of  Cambaya  and  Miliquiaz  (who  was  very  cunning), 
his  enterprise  should  come  to  be  known  before  ho  could 
start,  so  that  Adem,  which  he  was  determined  to  attack, 
should  get  ready  to  withstand  him.  And  what  made  him 
believe  this  more  than  ever  was,  that  just  at  thia,*junctu»e 
' See  the  map  of  FemEo  Voi  Dourado,  vol  ii,  p.  1,  ' 


AFONSO  DALBOQUKRQUK. 


245 


there  arriv^^d  unexpectedly  another  messenger  from  the  King 
of  Cambaya,  who  gave  out  that  he  had  come  to  hasten  for- 
ward the  settlement  of  the  treaty.  The  principal  reason  why 
Afonso  Dalboquerque  delayed  concluding  this  dispatch  was 
because  he  was  very  desirous  of  having  a personal  interview 
with  the  King  of  Cambaya,  and  i^s  it  was  now  very  late  in 
the  season,  and  they  were  like  to  lose  the  monsoon  for  the 
Straits,  and  D.  Garcia  do  Noronha,  who  was  to  accompany 
him,  could  not  possibly  join  him  in  time  to  perform  the  two 
enterprises  [of  going  to  Cambaya  and  the  Straits],  because 
ho  had  so  many  things  to  attend  to  in  Cochini  and  Calicut, 
Afonso  Dalboquerque  finally  dispatched  the  ambassadors 
with  the  intention  that  when  ho  was  tacking  for  the  Straits 
ho  would  make  his  way  to  Cambaya  and  visit  the  king,  pro- 
vided that  there  were  time  onoagh  for  it. 

And  when  he  had  examined  the  articles  and  conditions 
which  the  King  D,  Manuel  had  appointed  as  a basis  of 
peace,  he  determined  to  send  in  company  with  the  ambassa- 
dor, TVistft-o  Di^ga  as  ambassador  to  the  King,  and  Jc4o 
Gomez  as  his  scrivener,  with  a present  of  article.s  from  Por- 
tugal and  India ; and  the  instructiojjs  which  our  ambassador 
carried  were  to  demand  leave  to  erect  a fortress  in  Din,  for 
the  security  of  the  subjects  and  property  of  tlio  King  of 
Portugal ; and  that  the  merchants  of  that  kingdom  should 
send  their  merchandise  to  Goa  and  not  to  any  other  part, 
and  there  they  would  find  everything  they  required  by  way 
of  a homeward-bound  cargo;  and  that  the  king  sliould  not 
receive' any  Rumes  or  Turks  into  his  kingdom,  because  they 
were  capital  enemies  of  the  Portiiguoso. 

And  after  this  Afonso  Dalboquerque  dispatched  a messen- 
ger who  had  come  from  Miliquiaz  to  visit  him  as  long  ago 
as  before  his  arrival  at  Malaca,  and  before  this  one  returned, 
orders  were  given  that  he  should  be  taken  round  to  inspect 
^he  king^s  arsenals,  which  at  that  time  were  full  of  artillery, 
saddles  and  horse  gear,  weapons,  and  all  kinds  of  munitions 


246 


COUMENTARIES  OF 


and  material  of  war,  and  all  the  stables  filled  with  horses, 
and  a general  review  of  all  the  crossbowmen  and  musketeers 
was  ordered ; there  were  a great  number  of  these,  for  eveiy 
householder  of  Goa,  whether  married  or  single,  was  obliged 
to  carry  a crossbow  or  musket,  not  only  for  the  defence  of 
the  city,  but  also  in  case  pf  the  occurrence  of  any  unforeseen 
event. 

And  Afonso  Dalboquerque  likewise  commanded  that  this 
messenger  should  inspect  Bonestarij,  which  the  Turks  had 
built  very  strongly  with  ramparts,  and  see  the  place  where 
our  ships  rammed  it,  and  took  it  by  force  of  arms  from  the 
Turks,  not  dreading  in  the  least  the  numerous  guns  which 
were  posted  on  these  ramparts.  And  Afonso  Dalboquerque 
also  desired  that  he  should  be  taken  into  the  fortress  and 
see  the  destruction  which  had  been  wrought  within  it,  in 
order  that  he  might  tell  his  lord  not  to  place  much  con- 
'6denoe  in  the  ramparts  of  Diu,  if  the  King  of  Portugal  were 
to  command  him  to  take  it ; and  by  means  of  this  policy, 
which  Afonso  Dalboquerque  knew  well  how  to  carry  out 
both  in  peace  and  war,  as  long  as  ho  was  Governor  of  India, 
Miliqueaz  never  felt  himself  very  safe  in  Diu,  although  he 
was  very  crafty  in  dissembling  this  fear. 


CHAPTER  LIIL 

How  an  ambaasador  from  King  Vengapor  arrived  at  Goa,  and*  how  the 
great  HaTboquerque  bore  himself  with  Ro<^]c&o,  and  what  passed 
with  them. 

When  Trist&o  Ddga  and  the  ambassadors  *of  the  king  of 
Cambaya  had  set  out  in  one,  of  the  ships  belonging  to 
Miliqueaz  which  had  come  to  Goa  laden  with  provisions,  the 
grej^t  Afonso  Dalboquerque  dispatched^  Gaspar  Chanoca  to 
go  to  Narsinga,  for  he  bad  been  sent  thither  the 
expedition  to  Malaca  was  just  ttbout  to  start,  and  had  re- 


AFONSO  DALQOQUfDUQUK. 


247 


turned  with  the  answer,  bringing  back  in  his  company  an 
ambassador  fyom  the  king  of  Narsingti  with  a present  for  tho 
king  D.  Manuel,  and  this  ambassador  finding  tliat  tho  Por- 
tuguese had  not  returned  from  Malaca,  went  back,  and  this 
was  the  reason  why  Afonso  Dalboquorque  sent  Caspar 
Chanoca  back  again  with  similar  instructions  to  tho  king, 
giving  him  an  account  of  the  siege  of  Bonestarij;  and 
among  many  other  matters  which  he  was  to  relate  to  tho 
king  there  was  this,  that  inasmuch  as  all  the  kings  of  India 
had  granted  a site  in  their  harbours  for  the  construction  of 
a strong  house  wherein  the  property  of  tho  king  of  Portugal 
might  be  plreserved,  and  he  was  very  desirous  of  being  on 
friendly  terms  with  the  king,  therefore  ho  ought  to  grant 
him  such  a site  in  Baticala ; and,  in  return  for  this,  he 
would  willingly  forward  all  the  horses  that  came  to  market 
at  Goa  to  Narsinga,  for  ho  would  be  iriucb  more  pleased  to 
send  them  to  him  than  to  tho  HidulciXo  ; and  although  Fr. 
Luis  had  written  to  Afonso  Dalboquerquo  not  to  place 
much  reliance  upon  this  king^s  friendship,  iior  to  trust  in 
his  words,  yet,  as  long  as  the  king  of  Cari^opa  was  living, 
Afonso  Dalboquerquo  was  content  to  temporise  with  him, 
for  the  king  D.  Manuel  had  frcipaontly  sent  word  to  him  to 
strive  to  keep  on  good  terms  with  him  becaui^o  he  was  a 
Hindoo. 

Three  days  afterwards,  there  arrived  an  ambassador  from 
King  Vengapor  to  congratnlato  Afonso  Dalboquerquo  on  his 
return,  from  Malaca,  and  his  success  at  Bonestarij,  and 
brongnt  for  him  a present  of  sixty  hoif-o  trappings,  with 
their  covers  and  tail  [)ieces,  of  very  beautiful  wurkmanship 
and  finish,  with  twenty-five  saddles  with  their  stirrups  and 
furniture,'  and  sent  word  to  propose  to  Afonso  Dalboquerquo 
that  he  should  be  appointed  to  the  govoriimoiit  ot  the 

^ “ Smaifa  enberia^  k nivallo  com  .sru.v  ksu  irag^  e obra  muito 
.Vw  feitay’C  ficahnda/'om  i iiitc  e cinco  (.'‘in.ho.it  ifucirni^^s." 

(,'f.  " Ephippia,  frontalia,  phaicrijs,  et  togunicutii” — (Jsonos^  p.  263. 


248 


COMMENTARIES  OF 


lands  of  Goa,  and  for  them  he  would  pay  a certain  specified 
rent,  and  that  he  might  be  allowed  to  take  three  hundred 
horses,  of  which  the  king  was  in  great  need.^ 

Afonso  Dalbaquerquo  received  the  ambassadors  with 
very  great  kindness,  and  commanded  that  the  horses  which 
he  required  should  be  supplied  to  him  at  his  own  price,  and 
he  added  many  things  for  the  king  in  return  for  the  pre- 
sent, always  making  much  of  him,. for  besides  his  seeking 
after  the  friendship  of"  the  king  of  Portugal,  and  oSbring 
himself  in  person,  and  his  forces  to  aid  in  the  war  at  Goa 
against  the  Turks,  his  kingdom  is  a veritable  and  safe  road 
to  Narsinga,  and  well  supplied  with  provisions,  and  in  it 
they  make  caparisons  and  saddles,  and  everything  re- 
quired for  horses,  so  that  Goa  could  very  well  avail  herself 
of  all  these  things  whenever  need  of  them  should  arise. 

When  this  affair  was  over,  Ito<,mlc}To,  who  was  waiting 
quietly  in  the  territories  of  Goa,  on  the  other  side  of  the 
river,  after  tlie  rout  of  Benestarij,  very  often  sent  word  to 
Afonso  Dalboquerque  that  he  would  be  glad  to  have  an 
interview  with  him,  and  it  could  take  place  whenever  he 
liked ; and  when  Afonso  Dalboquerque  excused  himself  from 
this,  Ro^alcilo  knowing  that  ho  was  ready  to  set  out  from  Goa, 
became  more  importunate  in  his  requests.  Afonso  Dalbo- 
querquo  being  wearied  with  him,  and  considering  that  no 
harm  would  bo  done  to  the  treaty  of  peace,  which  was  being 
negotiated  with  the  Hidalcfto,  if  they  communed  together, 
appointed  a meeting  in  the  river  of  Benestarij,  aad  mot 

’ “Rex  Vengapor  (est  autera  Vengapor  Regio  raediterranea,  cum 
Zabaimi  regione  continens),  legatum  ad  Albuquercium  de  pace  misit, 
Komen  enim  illius  per  oroncs  illaa  terraaenm  boiuinum  admiratione  vaga- 
batur,  et  multi  ob  cam  causam  Regia  Emmanuelis  imperium  sequi  yole- 
bant,  ut  in  illius  tutela  eonstituti,  aliorom  Principum  tyrannidem  dc- 

clinarent Hoc  autem  postulabat,  ut  liceretsibiequoatrccentosprecio, 

ut  a?ii  faciebant,  pcrsoluto,  ex  urbe  singulis  aimis  educerei  Juit  huic 
postulato  satisf actum,  et  legatus  honorificc  dimissu8.”--0^ortow,  p.  26f>; 
From  this  it  appears  that  the  horses  to  be  delivered  yearly. 


AFONSO  DALBOQUfiRQUE. 


249 


[lira,  but  nothing  passed  except  corapliraonts  made  to  him 
by  Ro9alcao,  ..with  expressions  of  desiro  of  his  friendship, 
and  to  be  at  the  service  of  tho  king  of  Portugal. 

By  this  interview  Afonso  Dalboquerque  plainly  perceived 
that  Rogalcao  did  not  feel  himself  very  safe  in  the  position 
which  he  then  occupied,  and  that  the  Moors,  who  observed 
how  small  a force  he  had  left  under  him,  and  how  he  was 
out  of  favour  with  the  .Hidalcao,  were  thinking  of  raising 
a quarrel  with  him ; and  that  it  was  because  ho  might 
avail  himself  of  the  power  of  the  king  of  Portugal,  for  he 
dreaded  lest  the  HidalcS^o  should  come  against  him,  that  he 
was  so  desirous  of  being  on  friendly  terms  with  the  Portu- 
guese. 

Therefore  Afonso  Dalboquerque  would  not  accept  the 
offers  of  Ilo9alcao,  but  treated  him  with  uncertain  words, 
that  he  might  have  nothing  to  complain  of,  until  it  could 
be  seen  what  position  the  Hidalc&o  would  take  up  in  tho 
treaty  of  peace.  And  when  tho  interview  was  over,  Afonso 
Dalboquerque  inquired  of  Roqalcfto  for  news  of  tho  HidalcS-o; 
and  he  replied  that  there  was  a serious  dissension  in  his 
camp,  for  the  Persians  and  Cora^ones  were  opposed  to  the 
Turks  and  Humes  because  they  had  put  to  death  Camalcfto, 
6m  of  the  chief  captains  of  tho  court,  and  the  governor  of 
his  property,  who  was  by  birth  a Persian.  And  so  when 
they  had  conversed  upon  these  events  and  others,  Afonso 
Dalboquerque  took  his  leave  of  Reqalcn-o  and  returned  to 
Goa  without  coming  to  any  agreement  with  him,' 

‘ Correa,  at  p.  324,  says  that  Afonso  Dalbocpierque  oxoused  himself 
from  any  interview  with  lio<;alcao,  “O  goueruatlor  se  escusoii  de  fallar 
com  elle,  someute  Iho  manuJvudo  palauras  d’amizadea”. 


260 


COMMjfiNTAEl£S  OF 


CHAPTER  LIV. 

Of  the  arrival  of  the  embassy  of  the  Prestes  JoAo  at  Goa,  and  of  the 
manner  in  which  he  was  received ; and  how  the  great  Afonso  Dal- 
boquerque  sent  him  to  Portugal,  and  the  rest  which  took  place. 

When  the  groat  Afonso  Dalboquerquo  reached  the  city  he 
found  therein  Estevao  de  Freitas,  who  had  come  back  from 
Dabul  with  a message  for  him  from  D.  Garcia  de  Sousa,  in 
which  he  notified  that  at  that  port  there  had  arrived  a ship 
from  Zeila  bnnging  an  ambassador  from  the  Prestos  JoS-o,^ 
king  of  the  Abyssiuians,  to  the  king  of  Portugal,  and  the 
governors  of  the  land  had  detained  him,  and  he  desired  to 
know  what  he  ought  to  do,  for,  as  ho  had  received  com* 
mands  to  raise  the  blockade  of  the  port  until  further  orders, 
he  did  not  dare  to  meddle  with  him. 

This  news  very  much  gratified  Afonso  Dalboquerque,  for 
the  king  D.  Manuel  had  often  written  to  him  to  do  his 
utmost  to  obtain  information  concerning  the  Prestes  Jofto 
and  the  men  whom  the  king  D.  JoAo  before  his  death  had 
sent  to  that  country  by  land.^  He,  therefore,  lost  no  time 
in  sending  back  EstevAo  de  Freitas  in  the  fmta  which  had 
brought  him,  with  message  to  D.  Garcia  de  Sousa  that  lie 
should  send  the  ambassador  to  him.  And  when  Garcia  de 
Sousa  received  this  message  he  sent  word  to  the  governors 
of  the  land  that  the  man  whom  they  had  detained  was  an 
envoy  from  the  Prestes  JoAo  to  the  king  of  Portugal,  and 
that  the  captain-general  of  India  hearing  of  liis  arrival  had 
written  for  him  to  be  sent  on,  therefore  ho  begged  them  of 
their  kindness  to  hand  him  over  for  that  purpose,  and  that 
the  matter  would  not  admit  of  any  'doubt.  The  governors, 
although  they  had  at  first  determined  not  to  allow  this  man 
to  go  on  any  further  without  hearing  from  tho  Hidakau — 

* See  vol.  I,  chap.  liv. 

See  vul,  II,  111  trod  uctioi/,  p.  viii ; and  chaji.  xlix.  ' 


AFONSO  DALBQQUEKQUE. 


251 


to  whom  they  had  sent  word  of  his  arrival — nevertheless, 
dreading  lest  Garcia  do  Sousa  should  maltreat  them,  changed 
their  mind  and  delivered  him  up.  And  as  soon  as  EstevS.© 
de  Freitas  had  got  him  into  his  possession,  >he  hastened  the 
man^s  preparations  for  his  departure,  and  supplied  him  with 
provisions  and  everything  that  he  I’equired  for  his  voyage. 
And  as  soon  as  he  reached  the  bar  of  Goa  Afonso  Dalbo- 
querque  commanded  all  the  Fidalgoes  and  Captains  to  pro- 
ceed to  meet  him  in  their  boats.  This  ambassador  brought 
with  him  a piece  of  the  Wood  of  the  True  Cross  for  the 
king  D.  Manuel.  Afonso  Dalboquerque,  therefore,  went  to 
the  beach  to  receive  him,  with  all  the  clergy  and  inhabitants 
of  the  city,  with  crosses  in  procession,  and  there  they  took 
up  the  Wood  under  a canopy  to  the  Cathedral  Church,  and 
after  all  had  given  great  thanks  to  Our  Lord  because  he  had 
shewn  them  so  desirable  a thing  as  this  was,  the  opening 
of  a Toad  whereby  communication  could  be  made  with  the 
Prestes  Jo&o,  Afonso  Dalboquerque  ordered  that  the  ambas* 
sador  should  be  entertained  and  supplied  with  all  necessary 
things  for  the  expenses  of  himself,  his  wife,  and  a young 
man  and  woman  of  Abyssinia  who  were  in  his  suite. 

The  ambassador’s  name  was  Mateus;  ho  was  a white, 
and  of.  good  bearing,  and  stated  that  he  was  the  brother  of 
the  Patriarch^  of  Abyssinia.  And  although  our  people 
doubted  whether  he  wore  really  dispatched  by  the  Prestes 
Joao  or  not,  and  declared  that  he  was  a Moor,  a spy  sent 
by  the  Grand  Sultan,  yet  ho  conversed  upon  matters  of 
the  Faith  like  a man  who  had  been  brought' up  among 
Christians. 

What  an  astonishing  thing  it  is  that  our  people  should 
have  doubted  this  man  to  bp  a true  ambassador  from  the 
Prestes  Joao,  and  decided  hastily  that  he  was  a Moor,  for 
not  small  was  the  fame  of  the  name  and  power  which  Jbhe 
King  D.*Manuel  had  acquired  in  those  parts  of  the  world ; 
not  siiiall  was  the  reputation  ^of  the  constant  war  which  he 


252 


COMMBKTAEIKS  OF 


was  waging  with  the  Moors,  that  a king  so  seFiously  dedi- 
cated to  Christianity,  and  so  desirous  of  being  in  communi- 
cation with  Christians,  and  within  twenty  days’  sail  of 
India,  should  never  trouble  himself  to  learn  what  manner  of 
men,  and  what  sort  of  people  Christians  were,  although  ho 
had  in  his  own  territories  Portuguese  whom  D.  Jofto  the 
Second  had  sent  thither  ; and  that  although  he  had  Jerusa- 
lem  so  near  to  him,  whither  hfs  own  subjects  were  continu- 
ally journeying  to  vis=t  the  Holy  Sepulchre,  they  should 
doubt  whether  the  Warden  of  [the  Friars  of  the  Order  of] 
St.  Francis  of  Mount  Sion  had  sent  him  a piece  of  the  Wood 
of  the  Trufe  Cross  ! Those  are  the  works  of  Satan,  who  ever 
seeks  to  exercise  his  influence  in  the  quarter  where  he  per- 
ceivea  be  can  do  tbo  greatest  injury. 

Two  days  after  this,  Afonso  Ualhoquerque  commanded 
that  the  ambassador  should  be  brought  before  him ; and  m 
the  presence  of  Poro  Dalpoom,  the  secretary,  and  Alexander 
de  Ataide,  the  interpreter,  enquired  of  him  what  route  he 
had  taken,  and  how  it  was  that  the  Prestos  Jofto  bad  sent 
him  in  this  manner,  without  sending  also  with  him  some  ol 
the  Portuguese  who  were  in  that  country,  and  what  message 
it  was  that  ho  brought  with  him  for  the  King  of  Portugal. 
The  ambassador  replied  that  he  had  come  by  way  of  Zeila, 
and  that  only  in  the  same  hour  in  which  the  Prostes  Jofto 
bad  summoned  him  tp  depart,  had  ho  disclosed  also  to  him 
bis  route,  without  giving  notice  of  it  to  anyone,  and  had 
then  put  into  his  hands  the  letters  for  the  King  of  Portugal 
without  saying  anything  to  him  beyond  this,  that  ho  was 
to  make  his  way  to  India,  and  beg  the  Captain-General  to 
give  him  a passage  to  Portugal ; for  had  he  not  started  on 
his  journey  with  these  precautions,  and  had  it  been  known 
in  the  Court  of  the  l*restes  Jofto  that  he  was  setting  forth 
with  a message  for  the  King  of  Portugal,  in*  no  wise  could 
he  have  passed  through  the  country  of  the  Mooi;?  without 
great  peril.  The  message  which  he  brought  was  thftt  the 


AFONSO  DALBOQUERQUE. 


253 


Prestos  JoftQ,  his  Lord,  sent  word  to  desire  the  marriage  of 
his  children  wifh  those  of  the  King  of  Portugal,  as  it  were 
in  exchange ; and  to  offer  him  troops  and  supplies  for  the 
destruction  of  the  House  of  M4ca  and  the  Grand  Sultan  of 
Cairo,  and  all  these  he  would  order  to  bo  conveyed  to,  and 
delivered  at,  any  port  of  his  country,  whichever  he  might 
select;  that  the  Wood  of  the  True  Cross  which  he  brought 
was  sent  to  the  king  by  the  Warden  of  Jerusalem,  with 
whom  he  was  in  friendly  communication;  and  all  these 
matters  which  he  had  assorted  could  be  proved  to  bo  true 
by  the  letters. 

Afonso  Dalboquerque  declared  that  it  was  not  his  custom 
to  open  letters  which  were  directed  to  the  king  of  Portugal, 
nor  to  make  trial  of  the  ambassadors  who  wore  on  their  way 
to  him ; but  he  would  dispatch  him  on  liis  journey  imme- 
diately, so  that  he  might  make  the  passage  in  the  ships 
which  were  just  on  the  point  of  sailing  for  Portugal.  And 
in  order  that  this  Wood  of  the  True  Cross  might  go  with 
greater  ceremony  and  reverence  before  the  king,  Afonso 
Dalboquerquo  ordered  a casket  of  gold  to  bo  made  for  its 
reception.  And  as  he  was  now  very  anxious  to  set  out  on 
his  journey  for  the  Straits,  ho  sent  this  ambassador  to 
Jorge  jde  Melo  Pereira,  captain  of  Cananor,  with  orders  to 
grant  him  a passage  in  the  ship  of  Bernaldim  Freiro,  or 
of  Francisco  Pereira,  whichever  was  best  suited  for  him, 
and  to  supply  him  with  everything  necessary  for  his 
^voyage.. 

But  al;  Cananor  the  captain  and  everybody  held  this  am- 
bassador to  be  a buffoon  and  a spy  sent  by  tlie  Grand 
Sultan  ; therefore,  no  sooner  had  Bernaldim  Freire,  in  whose 
ship  he  took  his  passage,  set  sail,  than  he  received  very  bad 
treatment  at  that  captain's  hands,  and  at  Mozambique, 
where  the  shijf  watered,  he  was  even  put  in  irons  by  adjrice 
oi  Francisco  Pereira,  and  they  did  many  other  things 


254 


COMMIKTARIES  01* 


(thinking  thereby  to  injure  Afonso  Dalboquerq^e),  which  I 
will  not  repeat  now,  because  they  are  dead.* 

And  when  they  arrived  at  this  kingdom  of  Portugal, 
although  Bernaldim  Freire,  with  the  hopes  of  justifying 
\yhat  he  had  done,  said  a great  many  terribly  bad  things 
against  the  ambassador,  notwithstanding  all,  the  king  D. 
Manuel,  in  accordance  with  Afonso  Dalboquerque^s  letters, 
gave  him  a very  good  reception,  and  always  treated  him  in 
the  manner  due  to  an  embassador.  And  when  the  ambas- 
sador himself  had  lodged  his  complaints  with  the  king  con- 
cerning the  treatment  which  he  had  experienced  at  the 
hands  of  Bernaldim  Freire  and  Francisco  pQrfeira,  the  king 
ordered  that  these  men  should  be  thrown  into  prison  in 
Lisbon  Castle,  and  there  they  remained  until  the  ambas- 
sador set  out  for  India,  well  provided,  and  in  company  of 
D.  Rodrigo  de  Lima,  who  was  sent  by  the  king  D.  Manuel, 
as  ambassador  to  the  Prestea  Joao.  And  when  Diogo  Lopez 
de  Sequeira,^  Governor  of  India,  was  entering  the  Straits 
with  a fleet,  and  just  going  into  Ma(5ua,®  Mateus  the  am- 
bassador died,  but  D.  Rodrigo  proceeded  upon  his  embassy, 
whereof  I do  not  give  any  account,  because  it  did  not  take 
place  in  the  time  of  Afonso  Dalboquerque,  And  in  these 
same  ships  which  made  their  voyage  to  Portugal  that  year, 

lU 

^ These  actions,  whicli  are  so  magnanimously  passed  over  Unrecorded 
by  the  authw  of  the  Commnianes  are  thus  clearly  described  by  Correa. 

“ meterSo  o embaixador  em  ferros,  e Ihe  dormirao  com  as  molheres,  e 

esbofeteaiAo  e depenardo  as  barbas,  defamando  quo  era  truao,  falso,  o 
espia  do  Turqo,  que  Afonso  Dalboquerque  que  nom  o soubera  conhecer, ' 
e 0 queria  fazer  embaixador  do  FrOste  com  euganos  per  ElKey  por  se 
fazer  grandioso,”  etc.— Page  327. 

• Diogo  Lopez  de  Sequeira,  whose  portrait  is  given,  from  Goa,  by 
Pedro  Barreto  de  Resende,  in  Sloan,  MS.,  197,  p.  15,  succeeded  Lopo 
Soarez  de  Aluergaria  [Uue  successor  of  Afonso  Dalboquerque]  in  a.d. 
1618,  and  gave  place  in  1521  to  Dorn  Duarte  de  Id^nezes.  For  some 
biographical  memoranda  of  this  governor  the  reader  is  referred  to  the 
above  MS.,  and  vol.  ii,  pp.  31,  45. 

• Mafua^  on  the  Africah  side ; seOiMap,  vol.  i,  p.  80. 


AFOKSQ  PATaOQtTEfiQUlS, 


255 


there  caine  an  ambassador  from  the  king  of  Ormuz,  of 
which  I will  make  mention  in  his  place.  . ^ 


CHAPTER  LV. 

Of  the  arrival  of  D.  Garda  de  Noronha  at  Cocliim  ; and  how^  after 
settling  the  order  in  whiclji  the  vessels  were  to  bo  arranged,  and  dis- 
patching the  ships  which  were  to  sail  to  Portugal  during  that  year 
with  their  ladings,  he  set  sail  for  Cftlicut  with  all  his  fleet,  and  what 
took  place  there. 

D.  Garcia  Noronha  having  arrived  at  Cocliim,  and 
having  given  orders  to  the  vessels  concerning  the  cargo 
which  they  were  to  carry  that  year  to  Portugal,  and  arranged 
those  which  he  was  to  take  with  him,  sot  sail  for  Calicut 
with  all  his  fleet;  and  when  ho  got  in  front  of  the  city 
harbour,  the  prince,  brother  of  the  ^^amoriin  (who  was 
friendly  to  us),  sent  word  to  say  that  his  brother  the  (^amorim 
was  desirous  of  being  at  peace  with  the  king  of  Portugal, 
and  would  be  happy  to  grant  a site  in  Calicut  for  the  erec- 
tion of  a fortress,  and  would  pay  him  tribute.  Neverthe- 
less, on  account  of  the  delays  and  artifices  which  had  been 
practised  upon  Simflo  Rangel,  D.  Garcia  would  not  give  any 
reply  to  the  proposals,  but  went  on  with  the  war,  and 
blockade's  the  coast  in  such  a manner  that  not  one  ship  of 
all  those  which  were  ready  laden  to  sail  for  the  Straits 
venturod  out ; and  there  he  remained  during  the  whole  of 
the  mouth  of  January,  until  Afonso  Dalboquerqae  wrote  to 
him  to  quit  the  coast  and  come  away,  disclosing  to  him 
secretly  how  he  intended  to  sail  into  the  Straits  of  the  Red 
Sea,  whereby  they  would  be  more  certainly  enabled  to  cap- 
ture those  ships  with  all  their  goods  than  at  Calicut. 

As  soon  as  3.  Garcia  received  this  intelligence  from  his 
ujicle  ho  quitted  the  coast  and  proceeded  to  Cochim,  iind 
prepSifod  all  the  ships  whicli^  were  already  repaired,  and  set 


25G 


COUMEMTARIES  OF 


sail  with  them,  and  reached  Goa  on  the  tenth  pf  February, 
an(f  gave  an  account  to  Afonso  Dalboquerpue  of  all  that 
had  passed  with  the  Qamorim,  and  declared  how,  at  the 
last  moment,  the  prince  of  Calicut  had  written  him  a letter 
wherein  he  stated  that  the  ^araorim  was  sorry  that  he  had 
not  como  to  terms  of  peace  with  him,  and  was  now  willing 
to  grant  him  the  site  he  had  requested  for  the  erection  of 
the  fortress,  but  up  to  the  present  time  he  had  not  so 
granted  it,  because  the  Moors  who  wero  settled  in  Cairo 
had  prevented  him ; and  he  had  not  carried  on  the  matter 
any  further  because  of  his  recall. 

At  the  receipt  of  this  information,  Afonsq.  Balboquerquo 
waited  at  Goa  for  four  or  five  days,  and  dispatched  Fran- 
cisco Nogueira  with  instructions  (for  it  was  the  will  of  the 
king  D.  Manuel  that  if  a fortress  wore  built  in  Calicut  ho 
was  to  become  the  captain  of  it,  and  Gongalo  Mendez  was  to 
be  the  factor),  that  both  those  should  go  and  conclude  this 
business,  because  of  his  earnest  desire  to  set  his  foot  in 
Calicut.  And  Afonso  Dalboquerquo  further  commanded 
them  on  no  account  to  accept  any  site  for  the  fortress  unless 
if  were  within  the  reef  in  front  of  their  landing  pier,  in  the 
harbour  pool ; and  gave  him  letters  for  the  captains  and 
officials  of  Cochim  and  Cananor  containing  orders  for  them 
to  contribute  everything  that  was  required  for  the  work. 

Francisco  Nogueira  having  thus  taken  his  leave  Afonso 
Dalboquerque  set  sail  for  Cochim  to  mnko  his  preparations, 
and  delivered  his  letters  to  the  captain  and  the,  king’s 
officers ; awd  from  that  port  he  sailed  for  Calicut  to  set  to 
work  about  the  construction  of  the  fortress  in  accordance 
with  the  instructions  which  he  had  received  from  Afonso 
Dalboquerque.  But  when  the^  ^ambrim  knew  that  Afonso 
Dalboquerque  had  i^hildd  away  from  Goa,  and  that  there 
was  not  sufficiently  strong  a fleet  left  on  th%  coast  to  pre- 
vent ten  ships  from  setting  forth  laden  with  pepp^  for  the 
Straits,  he  temporised  with  Francisco  Nogueira  and  length- 


AFONSO  DALBOQUERQU*. 


ened  out  tbe  ncgotiatious  with  complimentary  communica- 
tions. And  Francisco,  finding  he  was  deceived  by  the  Qanio- 
rim,  returned  at  length  to  Cloa,  and  remained  there,  waiting 
for  the  return  of  Afonso  Dalboquerque ; and,  after  he  had 
set  sail,  the  Moorish  ships  which  had  their  cargoes  on  board 
ventured  out  and  began  their  voyage,  but  when  they  had 
gone  so  far  on  their  course  as  the  latitude  of  ^'acotora  to- 
wards Cape  Giiardafiim,  a squall  struck  them,  of  so  tempos- 
tuous  a eliaracter,  that  some  foundered,  and  others  ran  be- 
fore it  and  tried  to  put  in  to  some  of  the  ports  of  Cainbnya 
as  far  back  rfs  Dabul.  And  when  Afonso  Dalboquerque 
came  from  tho;^trait|!,  cruising  along  that  coast,  he  captured 
them  all,  and  took  them  into  Coa  ; and  at  the  loss  of  these 
ships  the  merchant  Moors  of  Calicut  w'cre  utterly  rained. 


ClIAPTEH  DVl. 

Mow  tlie  fjreat  Afonso  Dalborjaenpie  gave  an  to  the  Ciiptnins 

and  olhoors  of  tlio  King  concerning  the  letter  whielj  the  King  had 
written  to  him  rcBpectiiig  the  Rurreuder  of  (ioa  to  the  Hidalcao,  and 
what  was  agreed  to  in  this  behalf. 

Wh,CQ  thoso  nlfairs  wmro  over,  the  great  Afoic-'o  Dalho  - 
{|uen{uo  ordo’^cd  an  assembly  of  all  the  Cap)tains.  and  cer- 
tain of  those  Fldahjoefi  wdio  were  more  anciently  connected 
wilhdiidia,  and  the  king’s  officers,  and  to  each  one  separately 
he  caused  an  oath  upon  the  Holy  Evangoli  ts  to  bo  admi- 
nistc'i'ed,  tliat  tliey  wmuld  not  divulge  to  aMV()no*'t}iat  whicdi 
he  desired  to  unfold  to  them  ; thou  he  declared  to  them  huvv 
some  days  ago  lie  had  received  from  the  King  D.  Manuel  a 
letter  ordering  him  to  discuss^  with  them  whether  it  were  to 
' tho  good  of  his  service  that  Goa  should  bo  maintained  or 
not,  but  as  a 'heavy  press  of  business  liad  occupied  his 
atfeiitioii’  ever  since  the  arrival  of  tho  letter,  he  had  not 
' given  them  any  account  of  it,  nor  of  certain  articles,  sent 
VOL.  in. 


258 


COMHEKTARIES  OF 


to  him  also,  which,  in  his  opinion,  wore  th^work  of  Gaspar 
Peroira,  Louron^o  Moreno,  Antonio  Real,  and  Diogo  Pereira, 
for  he  had  Jong  ago  observed  tliat  they,  not  being  pleased 
with  the  war,  were  engaged  in  these  underhand  tricks  and 
conspiracies;  ai\d,  inasmuch  as  he  was  of  opinion  that  it 
would  be  very  prejudicial  to  the  estate  and  credit  of  the 
king  to  hold  a public  "council  over  this  matter,  ho  had 
thought  right  to  hold  it  in  such  a manner  as  would  be  least 
injurious  to  the  king^s  service,  and  thereforo  ho  begged 
them  of  their  goodwill  to' inspect  the  articles — which  he 
there  and  then  laid  before  them — and  to  writ^  to  His  High- 
ness what  their  opinions  wero  concerning  fdiis  matter,  in 
order  that  he  might  send  back  their  answers  in  the  ships 
which  were  just  about  to  start  on  the  voyage  to  Portugal. 

Letter  from  the  great  Afonso  Daehoquerque  to  the 
Kino  op  Poutugal  concerning  the  maintenance  ok 
Pout  to  DESK  power  in  Goa. 

Sire,  1 captured  Goa,  because  your  Highness  ordered 
me  to  do  so,  and  the  Marshal'  had  orders  to  take  it  in  his 
instructions  ; I took  it  also  because  it  was  the  headquarters 
of  the  league  which  was  set  on  foot  in  order  to  cast  us  out 
of  India  ; and  if  the  fleet  which  the  Turks  had  prepared  in 
Goa  river  (with  a large  force  of  men,  artillery,  aHd  arms, 
specially  assembled  for  this  object)  had  pushed  forward,  and 
the  fleet  of  the  Riimes  had  come  at  this  juncture,  as  they 
bad  expected,  without  doubt  I should  have  been  utterly  dis- 
comfited ; yea,  even  if  ever  so  great  a fleet  had  come  from 
Portugal  they  would  not  have  allowed  it  to  make  good  its 
arrival  in  the  country.  But  when  oace  Goa  was  conquered, 
everything  else  was«at*our  command  without  any  further 
trouble,  and  when  Goa  w'as  taken,  that  one  vjptory  alone  did 
moror^for  the  advancement  of  Your  Highness’ prejirft^dhan 

^ B.  Fernando  Continlio;  |^ee  vol.  ir,  cUap.  xiii. 


AFONSO  DALBOQUERQUE. 


259 


all  the  fleets  wjiich  have  come  to  India  during  the  last 
fifteen  years.  And  if  Your  Highness,  in  deference  to  the 
opinions  of  those  who  have  written  this  advice  to  you, 
thinks  it  possible  to  secure  your  dominions  in  these  parts  by 
means  of  the  fortresses  of  Cochiin  and  Cananor,  it  is  im- 
possible ; for,  if  once  Portugal  should  suffer  a reverse  at 
sea,  your  Indian  possessions  have  not  power  to  hold  out  a 
day  longer  than  the  kings  of  the  land  choose  to  siifter  it ; 
for  if  one  of  our  men  take  anything  by  force  from  a native, 
immediately  they  raise  the  drawbndge  and  shut  the  gates 
of  the  fortrests;  aud  this  causes  Your  Highness  not  to  be 
Lord  of  the  Land,  as  of  Goa,  for  in  this  territory  the  injury 
which  is  done  to  Moors  or  to  Portuguese  docs  not  reach 
beyond  the  (Jiiptain  of  the  Fortress.  Justice  is  yours,  and 
yours  the  arni,  yours  the  sword,  and  in  the  hand  of  your 
Captain-General  reposes  the  punishment,  and  before  him 
lies  the  reinody  for  the  complaint  of  every  one ; and  if  to- 
day there  be  any  iinproveinent  in  regard  to  the  obedicMico 
shewn  by  the  natives  of  the  land,  it  is  plainly  to  be  referred 
to  the  fact  that  the  taking  of  Goa  keeps  India  in  repose 
and  quiet;  and  the  fact  that  the  island  1ms  so  frequently 
been  attacked  by  the  Turks,  as  those  who  wrote  to  Your 
Highness  assert,  and  so  valiantly  defended  by  the  Portu- 
guese, enhances  the  credit  which  the  progress  of  aflairs  in 
these  parts  deserves.  And  I have  so  completely  disheart- 
eiiel  the  members  of  the  league  against  us,  that  the  King 
of  Cambaya,  powerful  prince  as  he  is,  lost  i.o  time  in  send- 
ing to  me  his  Ambassadors,  and  restoring  to  "me  all  the 
Cavaliers  and  Fidahjoes  who  were  shipwrecked^  with  D. 
Afonso  do  Noronha,  my  nephew,  on  their  voyage  from 
^acotord,  without  my  seudiug  to  ask  this  of  him,  and  even 
offered  me  permission  to  build  a forti'ess  in  Diu,^  a matter 

» l?ee  vij.  li,  p.  211. 

wt  For  a coloured  plan,  aud  description  of  the  extensive  fortificjitious 
made  by  the  Fortugucs.'  in  latoi’  limes  ;it  Diir  see  Pedro  IJarielo  de 


260 


COMMENTARIES  OF 


of  such  immense  importaoce  that  even  now  I can  hardly 
believe  it ; and  I am  now  importuned  by  the  Qatnorim  of 
Calicut,  who  desires  to  grant  me  a site  to  build  a fortress 
in  his  cit}^,  and  is  willing  to  pay  a yearly  tribute  to  the 
Crown.  All  th?^  is  the  result  of  our  holding  Goa,  without 
my  waging  war  upon  any  of  these  princes. 

“And  I hold  it  to  be  free  from  doubt,  that  if  fortressf33  be 
built  in  Diu  and  Calicut  (as  1 trust  in  Our  Lord  they  will 
be) — w'heu  once  they  have  been  well  fortified,  if  a thousand 
of  the  Sultanas  ships  were 'to  make  their  way  to  India,  not 
one  of  these  places  could  bo  brought  again  under  his  dorni- 
niou.  lint  if  those  of  your  council  understood  Indian  affairs, 
as  I do,  they  would  not  fail  to  be  aware  that  Your  Highness 
cannot  be  lord  over  so  extensive  a territory  as  India  by 
placing  all  your  power  and  strength  in  your  marine  only  (a 
policy  at  once  doubtful  and  full  of  serious  inconveTu'ences) ; 
for  this,  and  not  to  build  fortrcs.scs,  is  the  very  thing  which 
the  Moors  of  these  land.s  wish  you  to  do,  for  they  know 
well  that  a dominion  fuundc'd  on  a navy  alone  cannot  Inst, 
and  they  desire  to  live  on  their  estates  and  property,  and 
to  carry  their  spiceries  to  the  ancient  and  customary  mar- 
kets which  they  maintain,  but  they  are  unwilling  to  be  sub- 
ject to  Your  Highness,  neither  will  they  trade  or  Jbe  on 

Re.sei)de'8  MS.,  Sloan.  1D7,  H seq.  Mr.  T.  W.  H.  Tofhort,  in  his 

paper  on  “I'he  Portuguese  Sctik'iiMntb  in  India”  (/Voc.  yljsiaf.,.SV)c., 
Be/iqal^  June  1H74,  p.  IJI),  says  l>iu  is  the  most  intenjsting  cf  all  the 
Portuguese  petth  iiK'nts  after  (loa,  hut  the  one  least  known  to  ICngliBh- 
liien,  as  it  liel  so  out  of  the  way.  J’he  passage  froiii  liaman  to  Dili  in  a 
sailing  ve^fiel  takes,  on  an  average,  tliree  or  four  days.  Th(^  island  of 
Did  lies  to  the  south  of  K4thiw.4r.  Its  length  from  east  to  west  is  about 
seven  miles ; its  average  width  from  nouth  to  south  scarcely  a mile.  It 
is  separated  from  the  mainland  by  % narrow  arm  of  the  sc'a,  the  eastern 
access  to  which  is  easy*^for*  shij^>8  of  considerable  burden,  while  the 
western  access  is  obstructed  by  shallows.  A portion  <9f  the  Portuguese' 
temtc.ryj  including  the  village  of  Gogola,  lies  m the  north  of  the, inlet 
adjoining  the  nminlamh  'I’he  fortress  or  citadel  of  Di6,  buWt  by  tSic 
Portuguese  in  1585,  a fonnidablc  and  imposing  structure,  is  at  the  ex- 


AJ^KSO  DALBOQUERQUE. 


261 


friendly  terras  w^h  you.  And  if  they  will  not  havo  any  of 
these  things,  how  is  it  likely  that  they  will  be  pleased  to 
see  us  establishing  ourselves  in  this  city  of  Goa,  and 
strengthening  its  defences,  and  Your  Highness  lord  of  so 
important  a port  and  bar  as  this  is,  and  not  labour  with  all 
their  might  to  hinder  us  from  accomplishing  our  intentionst 
And  if  it  seems  a hard  matter  to""  those  who  have  w ritten 
about  this  to  Your-  Highness  that  the  recovery  of  Goa 
should  have  been  so  many  times  attempted,  how  much 
harder  must  it  have  been  to  l(ain  the  country  from  so 
powerful  a kitig  as  the  Hi(lalc5,o,  lord  of  so  many  armies, 
who  is  not  liks^ly  to  refrain  from  straining  every  nervo  to 
recover  the  possession  of  it  and  striking  a decisive  blow’  at 
if  ho  could  do  so  ? And  vvlienover  any  unf*  of 
his  captains  shall  come  up  against  tliis  cilv,  are  we  lo  sur- 
render it  immediately  without  first  of  all  measuring  our 
forces  against  liim  ? If  this  be  so,  Your  lliglmcss  mny  as 
well  leave  India  to  the  Moors,  and  seek  to  maintain  your 
position  therein  with  such  extiauidiuarv  ouilnys  and  ex- 
penses on  the  navy,  in  shipvS  as  rotten  us  cork,  only  kept 
afloat  by  four  pumps  in  each  of  them 

‘'As  for  tlie  extraordinary  expenses  eoniiicted  with  the 
maintj^mance  of  Goa,  of  which  these  idle  fellows  write  to 

tromo  eaht  6r  nortlioMst  point  of  liio  iHlainl.  'I  iio  fort*!]  ’;i lions  are  eon- 
stnicted  of  stone  dng  in  the  island,  and  tbr  fown  (u-  I’liica  is  intu .•reeled 
by  tile  i',un)ei’OU3  qiiairieB  thiid  exeavated.  'I’lu*  sU>ne  s .nu  Avhat  ru- 
se iubU‘8  i he  hiterite  of  the  Malab.ir  coast,  lait  is  ti;iti«  rin  ( (iKair  and 
much  stronger  iu^ubstauce.  'i’hret;  grtatcvviits  hav*'  ii!adM)iu  iimnor- 
ablo  in  tile  liistory  of  I’ortngiicse  India: — 1.  'J’ne  'I  '.'iih  ol  King  Bah6.- 
diir  of  Cambay,  followed  by  the  siege  of  bin,  in  lh:’'7-<S.  2.  'Die  second 

bit'ge  of  bill,  in  1510.  Tlie  sack  of  J)iu  by  And>s  from  Maskat,  in 
16()H.  The  two  former  are  jimongst  the  most  giorions  incMflenls  of  i’or- 
tuguese  history,  and  may  be  compan-d  to  tbc  ilcfeucu  of  Arkat  or  to  that 
of  bakhnau  in  tlnvlAstory  of  British  India.  The  third  event  wua  a sad 
contrast  to  the  two  fo^'mer,  and,  with  other  coiitetnjtorary  disasters, 
marked  die  decwlence  of  rortngueBc  power.  Correiv  has  preserved  a 
sketch  of  the  fovtiess  in  his  ilays,.  ahont  lobl. 


262 


COMHEljTABlES  OF 


Your  Highness,  the  mere  dross  of  India  igp  so  great,  that  if 
the Portuguese  possessions  be  properly  farmed  by  your 
officers,  tho  revenue  from  them  alone  would  suffice  to  repay 
a great  part  of  these  expenses  to  which  we  are  put,  and  if 
they  say  that  the  reason  why  I desire  to  keep  possession  of 
fcioa  is  because  it  was  I who  took  it,  Your  Lordship  may 
rest  assured  that  if  I whro  a Portuguese  of  such  a character 
as  they  are,  I would  be  the  first,  if  you  ordered  me  to 
destroy  it,  to  put  the  pickaxe  into  the  walls,  and  to  fire 
the  barrel  of  gunpowder  finder  tho  koep,^  if  only  for  the 
pleasure  of  seeing  the  cards  of  tho  game  of  India  shuffled 
for  a new  deal;*  but  as  long  as  I live,  and  vjiile  it  remains 
my  duty  to  send  an  account  to  Your  Highness  of  Indian 
affairs,  Goa  must  not  be  dismantled,  for  I would  not  that 
my  enemies  should  exult  in  the  contemplation  of  any  serious 
disaster,  to  this  estate ; and  I must  sustain  it  at  my  own 
cost,  until  they  get  their  wishes  and  another  Governor  be 
sent  to  rule  over  it. 

If  this  that  I say  does  not  agree  with  tho  ideas  of  some 
of  those  who  are  half-hearted  about  this  matter  of  Goa, 
Your  Highness  may  know  for  certain  that  as  yet  there  is 
one  man  who  is  governing  it ; and  old  and  weak  as  I am,  I 
will  accept  the  governmeut  of  this  conquered  territory  at 
Your  Highness’s  hands,  if  it  may  be  permitted  mo  to  confer 
the  lands  of  the  Moors  upon  the  Cavaliers  and 'Pidal goes 
who  have  assisted  me  to  gain  them.  But  do  not  req^uro. 
of  me  every  year  an  account  of  what  I am  doing  ^as  if  I 
were  a taxgatherer,  because  four  ill-manner^  fellows,  who 
sit  at  home  like  idols  in  their  pagodas,  have  borne  false 
witness  against  me ; but  honour  me,  and  thank  me,  for  I 
shall  be  happy  to  complete  this  enterprise,  and  spend  what 
little  I have  upon  it  f an^,  in  conclusion,  all  that  I have  to 
say  is,  that  if  Your  Highness  either  now  o^  at  any  other 

■t' 

* 7'orre  de  mtnogtw., 

’ Vm  tal  que  esle  jogo  da  Indh.  se  lornam  a haratha. 


AFONSO  DALBOQUBRQITE. 


263 


time  surrender  Goa  to  the  Turks,  then  plainly  Our  Lord 
desires  that  tbe  Portuguese  dominion  in  India  should  c6me 
to  an  end  and,  as  for  me.  Your  Highness  may  bo  sure 
that,  so  long  as  I am  Governor,  although  T be  put  to  much 
trouble,  I shall  not  at  any  ratf3  send  you  pa'uted  pictures  of 
fictitious  places,  but  rather  kingdoms  taken  by  force  of  arms 
from  their  masters,  and  fortified  by  me  in  such  a rnatiner 
that  they  may  give  a^ood  account  of  thenjsclves  in  all  time. 

^'This  is  my  opinion  concerning  this  question  of  Goa, 
vhich  Your  Highness  cominandad  me  to  discuss  with  its 
captains  and  OiTicers.’^ 


Articles  wuich  tue  Kino  sknt  to  Afonso  Dalroocerque 
CONCERNING  GoA. 

That  Goa  was  very  unhealthy,  and  was  the  cause  of 
unnecessary  expense,  of  no  use  except  to  give  trouble  to 
the  soldiers. 

'riiat  therein  tlicro  must  always  be  a continued  war,  for 
the  Hidalctlo  was  so  powerful,  that  he  would  be  sure  to  try 
his  utmost  to  recover  it,  because  it  was  the  capital  of  his 
dominions. 

^'TJiat  the  roveuues  of  the  mainland,  upon  wliich  Afonso 
DalboqiiorquQ  laid  great  importance,  wore  impossible  to  bo 

' Cuuipare  smtiinenta  with  the  peciili'ir  ide.-w  of  a Au'iter  who 
d 1.18 ‘lately  vinitod  Goa : — “ Portuguese  India  is,  thank  Hoavon,  only  a 
strip  of  n,bout.  sevonty  miles  long  which  they  would  do  mm'h  better  to 
sell  to  the  british  (iovornment ; for  of  all  the  God-forgotton.  dcHerted 
holes,  one  tbousjmd  years  behind  the  rest  of  Creation,  1 have  never  seen 
unj^tlung  to  e<ptal  Goa.  Do  not  let  the  residents  wiio  read  this  fancy 
that  I am  touching  them  iu  any  w^ay.  I only  remember  them  as  charming, 
kindly,  gentle,  hospitable  pohple,  whom  I pitied  for  liaviug  to  live  there. 

I have  lived  iu  sandy  deserts,  and  in  prinii^val'^forosts,  and  luive  suffered 
hunger  and  thirst,  cold  and  heat,  fatigue,  privations,  and  danger,  and 
thought  it  charming;  1 hated  the  life  at  (roa.  ft  is  </eod,  and  uo- 
thjing  rt'A'^ards  one.” — .Iref/zoi,  /adhf,  by  Label  burton.  London, 

* 1879..  u.  301). 


20 i COMMENTARIES  OP  AFONSO  DALBOQUEEQUE. 

collected,  except  by  maintaining  a great  number  of  people 
witH  heavy  expenses  for  collection  of  this  revenue,  because 
tho  Hidalcfio  himself  could  not  collect  them  without  the 
assistance  of  a large  army. 

That  tho  Hfdalcao  w'ould  be  glad  to  agree  to  any  pro- 
|)Osal,  .and  become  tributary  to  Ills  Highness,  provided  that 
Goa  vvoro  restored  to  him." 


After  all  had  examined' those  articles,  they  wrote  to  tho 
king  that  tliey  were  amazed  at  His  Highness  desiring  to 
Burrender,  in  pursuance  of  tho  advice  of  men*  who  had  never 
donned  a suit  of  armour  for  tlie  sake  of  expt'riencing  the 
trouble  it  would  involve,  a })laco  so  commodious  and  so 
important  to  his  cause  as  tloa,  which  had  been  acquired  at 
the  cost  of  so  much  l^ortugueso  blooil.  When  tho  king  read 
the  letter  of  Afonso  .I)albo(|ncrr|no,  am)  the  opinion  of  the 
captains,  he  wrote  in  reply  that  ho  coiomlered  it  of  great 
importance  to  retain  Goa,  and  thanked  him  very  much  for 
tho  way  in  wdiich  he  had  conducted  this  matter.  And  as 
soon  as  tho  Turks  had  been  cast  out  of  BeiK'starij,  a feeliug 
of  relief  gradually  came  over  Goa,  and  the  city  began  to 
flourish,  .and  those  wdio  had  written  to  the  king  advjsing  its 
demolition  became  very  much  ashamed  oft  ever  having 
written  such  a thing.  And  it  was  on  this  account  that 
Afonso  Dalboquerque  often  used  to  say  that  he  des^^ped* 
more  thanks  from  the  King  D.  Manuel  for  defending  Goa 
for  him  agftinst  the  Portuguese,  than  he  did  for  capturing 
it  on  two  occasions  from  the  Turks. 


EnB  of  the  Third  Part. 


APPENDIX. 


DJC8CEIPT10N  OF  MALACCA,  FROM  PEDRO  BARRKTTO  DE  RESENDe’s 
^'LIVRO  do  ESTADO  da  INDIA  ORIENTAL^', 

Sloanfi  Manuscript,  107. 


MALLAQUA.  . 

DKSORiPSAM  DA  FOIITALLEZA  DE  MALLAQUA. 


A fortalleza  de  Mallaqua  esta  plantada  na  costa  orieutal 
do  luntana  ontre  ho  rio  Panagim,  o Muar  em  altura  de 
dou8  graos  e vinte  menutos  da  Batida  do  Norte  foy  conquls- 
tada  e fundada  pello  insigno  Afonso  de  Albuquerque  ein 
quiuze  de  Agosto  de  mil  quiuhetos  o onze  esta  oje  foyta 
(^idado  quo  tern  a fortalleza  dentro,  e a (^^idade  sercada  do 
hum  muro  de  pedra  e cal  de  altura  do  viute  pes  e a largura 
comessa  ombayxo  oin  doze  e arremata  emsima  em  seto  pal- 
mos.  Tern  seis  balluartos  cm  que  entra  ho  que  chamft  Cou^ 
rassa.cada  hum  chamado  com  o nomo  quo  nellos  ostam 
escritos.  Tqdos  os  muros  com  seus  parapeytos;  o cada 
balluarte  lem  de  prassa  vinte  passes.  E o que  chamA  Madre 
do  p[eo]s  a tern  dobrada  de  man[ei]ra  que  apenas  pode  ser  de- 
fendidq'  e lauado  dos  mais  Balluartes : o sircuyto  do  todo 
este  muro  he  de  quinhoiitos  e doze  passes  entrarido  tambem 
ho  lugar  que  ocupain  os  Balluartes : do  Balluarte  do  Ospi- 
tal  athe  Sam  Domingos  ha  contramuro  e do  de  Sanctiago 
athe  Madre  de  Deos  cc/m  entulho  no  raeo  ficaudo  tudo  de 
largura  de  catorze  palmos,  a artilhliritfc*  que  ha  nostes  Ballu- 
artes sam  qua/enta  e huma  pessas  de  doze  athe  quarenta  e 
qpati'o  Ihiras  de  pillouro  de  ferro.  Todas  sam  de  bronze, 
tirado  noue  que  sam  de  ferro  pera  a qiial  lA  bastaute  poluora 


266 


APPENDIX. 


e monisOis  nos  nlmozeis  de  sua  dj^-stas,  eafcani  lan- 

sadaa  no  clifi  doze  das  grossas,  aern  repayroa  dedicadus  pera 
ho  forte  da  ilha  das  naos  quo  sc  csla  fuzeiido,  e tamhom 
estam  algnrnas  das  nutras  pessas  rebontadas  — - 

Os  cazados  biiUKjUos  quo  ha  iicsta  Oidade  sam  duzentoa 
sinquenta,  os  quaes  tcram  dous  mil  nogros  catiuoa  de  difo 
renles  nas<lis,  quo  todos  sain  do  annas,  o as  torn  bastantos 
pera  dies : povquo  raro  he  lio  cazado  que  nam  tem  scu 
cabide  do  lansas,  e seto,  oyto,  c des  niosquetes  on  espingar' 
das  do  pedorneyva  com  mouisOis  bastantos  para  ollas:  porein 
destos  duzcutos  e simpimita  cnzados  branqnos,  os  cento 
viuem  da  outra  bando  do  rio  quo  chamA  a bauda  de  Malla- 
qua.  A respe}to  do  ho  piquoim  sirouyto  qua  boa  deatro 
nos  niiiros  ostarem  tres  (.’onuentos  (|ne  ho  ocupam  (juazi 
todo  j o do  Sam  Paulo,  Barn  Domingos,  o Sancto  Agostinlio 
0 viuem  os  ditos  oazados  ein  cazas  «lo  palha  arriscudos  a 
hum  jusondio  Ho  esta  baada  muy  fresca  do  pumaves,  e 
ortas  de  diuorsos  fruytos  ---  Viuem  fora  do  Mulla(|ua  muyfcos 
cazados  Christilos  da  terra  todos  mny  boa  gen  to  do  annas  o 
as  tem  de  toda  sorto  particmllarmt mto  espingardcs  porquo 
tinl  com  elias  muyto  bom.  Jvstes  cm  toda  ocazia  de  gerra 
snm  mny  prestos  o dellegcnte*s:  os  mais  delles  andti  buscando 
siia  vidn  : sam  tam  arriscados  que  por  muy  pouco  dAo  coin 
hum  cris  pella  barriga  ferida  quo  tem  ponco^  ou  nenhurna 
cum  porquo  alom  do  serem  cstas  armas  pella  mayor  parte 
de  po.ssonha'b  mcdo  do  sou  fey  tie  acollebrinado  mostra  bem 
o dano  (pie  fara,  alem  do  que  a pcsoniia  basta  so  tirar  sange 
para  matar! 

A fortalkiza  quo  esta  dentro  nesta  Tjidado  onde  vine  o 
Capitam  he  huma  torro  de  siiujuo  sobrados,  e no  sogundo 
vine  0 Capita  ern  huina  cnza  do  quadro  como  ho  ho  a torre 
que  torn  cadti  pano*de  pnrede  vinte  passes.  Nos  outros 
agazalha  o Capita  ospedes  o so  tem  a poluora.  *No  primeiro  se 
guardaua  quatro  mil  caiidis  de  arroz  quo  agora  na  ftA  Ttyji 
huma  serca  de  muro  da  mesraa  altura  do  da  (jidade  e largura. 


Al’PtNDlX. 


207 


Ao  liuel  do  se^ndo  sobrado  da  torre  vS  correndo  bumaa 
cazas  oude  ae  agazalha  a faioillia  do  dito  capita.  Nil  ba  Aquy 
artilharia  mais  quo  a roforida  (jue  lica  nos  Ballaartcs 
Tern  esta  ^^bdado  a renda  do  bimi  por  sento  aplicada  pcra  aa 
obras  da  fortificassa,  que  no  tocanto  bils  do  u'/iro  estam  ja  aca- 
badas.  0 Rey  da  terra  dontro  ondo  csta  esta  fortaloza  tk) 
Mallaqua  he  ho  Rey  de  Jor  e Patii,  e grande  amigo  dos  Por- 
tuguezes,  ho  senhor  de  mais  do  90111  legoas  de  costa,  e nit 
se  estende  muyto  polla  terra  dentro ; no  mar  ho  tilbem  sen- 
hor de  hua  corda  de  ilhas  que? ha  ncste  dostrito  a mayor 
parte  dellas  abitadas;  a gente  sam  Malayos,  a ley  que  pro- 
fessa  he  de  Mquros  0 poder  que  tem  he  do  athe  doze  mil 
homes  do  armas,  e brigil  com  artilharia,  mosquotes,  aza- 
gayas,  paos  tostados  que  ehaniil  salligiis,  espadas,  rodeUs, 
arcos,  e frechas : crises  de  quo  so  tem  foyto  meusa,  0 som- 
pitas  que  sa  hiias  frcchas  piqueninas  do  pessonha  quo  rnetom 
em  zaruatauas  0 tiraui  com  asopro  cO  ellas  e basfca  tirarc 
sangue  para  niatarem  loguo ; Christandade  nil  ha  nas  suas 
terras.  E pello  Rio  asima  de  Mallaqua  tom  os  cazndos  della 
inuytos  e muy  frescas  ortas  cu  muyta  diucrsidade  do  fruytas 
que  has  ha  ntjsta  terra  iiiuy  boas  alem  do  toda  a sorte  das 
que  se  dam  na  India  rnuytas  outras ; 0 he  muyto  para  notar 
quo  90m  esta  cidado  estar  quazi  debayxo  da  linha  he  de 
ares  muy  sadja  e do  aquas  exsellentes,  e muy  fresca  e fertil 
do  tudo^ho  quo  Die  semci'i:  onde  choue  quazi  todos  os 
diqf?e  noytes=:  Tom  os  cazados  de  Mallaqua  rnuytas  legoas 
do  tevra  do  quo  sit  senhorcs.  De  huina  bauda  athe  o 
Cabo  Rachado  e da  outra  athe  o Rio  Fermozo,  e tarnbem 
rnuytas  legoas  polla  aorta,  porem  tudo  despouoado  sem 
quem  ho  cultiuo,  sendo  terras  muy  fertis  e quo  dera  muyto 
aiTOZ=  Confina  pell»'  terra  dentro  cO  hoa  Mnnamcabos 
Mouros  de  huma  terra  quo  chamft  Rkido,  vassallos  delRey 
de  Pa,  e jun^  dolles  estam  sinquo  ou  seia  mil  tarnbem 
4os’  mesmos  Mouros  J\Iauaucabos,  vassallos  de  sua  Mag<*® 
que  tem  hum  Fortiigues  c’izadu  em  Mallaqua  que  hos  go- 


268 


APPENDIX. 


uerna,  que  cLamft  Taraungfttn,  offissio  que  'da  ho  Vizorrey: 
a elte  obedessem : o morrendo  algummo  Mouro  destea  sem 
filbos  erda-o  este  Tamimgam,  e tondo-oa  ae  coriaerta  cO 
elles  t de  todas  as  couzas  quo  julga  tem  des  por  ^ento.  Oje 
sorue  hum  Port^igues  em  vida  este  offissio  = Laui'ft  estos 
Mouros  grand cs  terras  dc  quo  so  sustonta  e particullar- 
mente  com  niuyto  betre : com})n\  Callayra  aos  da  terra  den- 
tro  que  vem  trazor  a Mallaqua=  0 J^io  desta  (^^idade  e porto 
do  Mallaqua  he  de  agoa  dossc  do  hum  tiro  do  pedra  de  lar- 
gura : de  bayxamar  tem  ho  canal  da  barra  pal  mo  e meo  do 
agoa  0 em  conjunsii  de  agoas  vluas  so  quatro  dedos  quo 
apenas  cobre  a vaza  de  quo  lie  o fando  -~  o^do  preamar  eni 
agoas  viuas  huma  brasa  o quatro  palinos ; o cm  roortas  do 
sinquo  para  seis  palmos,  e logo  pouqua  distansia  pera  siina 
vay  estreytando  e tem  quatro  o tres  brassas  e em  partes  o 
.384.  seu  fundo  sera  de  huma  sem  faltar  cm  vazantes  iicm  en- 
chentes  de  mare : Tem  muytos  lagartos  grandes  e carnisey- 
ros  por  cuja  cauza  e ser  de  vaza  sc  iiam  vadoa=  Por  esto 
Rio  e terra  den  tro  ha  nniytas  ortas  iis.sy  de  cazados  Portu- 
guezes  como  dos  da  terra  em  que  viuem  com  suas  faraillias 
laurando  as  terras  cA  grande  proveyto—  ha  muytos  tigres 
que  antigamento  erA,  muy  carnisoyros  e depois  que  hum 
bispo  os  excomiingou  ho  m\  sam  tanto:  Todos  estes  cazados 
tem  8ua8armas=  Mea  legoa  polio  Rio  asima  so  atrauessa  de 
noyte  ho  mesmo  Rio  cO  hum  pao  prezo  em  huma  cadea  e 
fechado  cO  4i[um  cadeado  ao  pee  do  huma  guarita  Oqde  ^ 
asiste  hum  Portugues  quo  a (^idade  proue  e Ihe  paga  cada 
mes  seis  crtizados  por  nilo  Icuarem  nem  trazerern  fazenda 
defeza  has  iiaos  grandes  que  fieft  aynda  ao  mar  da  ilha  das 
naos:  a cujo  respeyto  so  tem  mandadofazor  bum  forte  nesta 
ilha,  a qual  esta  na  bem  de  fronte  daH^lidade  seiift  hum  pouco 
perabayxo  distansia  tSo  *mil  e qninhentos  passes  da  Qidade, 
e 0 canal  quo  vay  pello  meo  he  piqueno,  e nJP  capes  de  era- 
barca^iOis  grandes,  de  bayxamar  fica  cfi  muy  poiicif 
fundo  de  vaza : — Tambem  fica  outra  restinga  de  area  mais  ao 


APPENDIX. 


269 


mar  e entro  ella  ilha  hd.  canal  de  seis  brassas  a ilha  he  mais 
cCprida  que  larga  ves  e mea  : tera  ern  roda  sessenta  brassas 
quazi  da  figure  de  huma  ferradura  de  cauallo.  Tem  hum 
outeyro  leuantado  montuoso  quatro  pera  sinquo  brassas  = 
0 forte  que  se  fas  aqiiy  pera  que  ja  esta  frytos  aliserses  he 
couza  piquena  de  triuta  passes  de  prassa  em  quadro  pera 
que  esta  separada  a dita  arfcilliaria':  o effeyto  pera  que  se 
fas  he  para  defender  as  embarcasc^is  grandes  que  nS  podern 
estar  a sombra  da  artilharia  da  fortalleza  e na  tem  oje  mais 
que  hos  aliserses  ficandose  ajuntAndo  todos  os  materials  em 
Mallaqua  pera  'se  acabar  todo  de  huma  ves  : porque  indo  se 
fazendo  pouco  n pouquo  o podo  vir  senhorear  o enemigo  e 
huma  ves  ocupado  por  ello  sera  do  grande  detrimento  a 
Mallaqua  = ==== 

A ponte  que  se  mostra  na  planta  tem  dous  pegOis  cada 
hum  de  dous  brassas  e mea  de  altura,  e de  outro  tanto  de 
comprido  e cO  muy  pouca  largura  cO  quo  so  nil  pode  cuydar 
hos  que  algiis  praticauft  de  serem  estos  pegOis  couza  donde 
se  pudesse  offender  a Mallaqua:  a ponte  quo  esta  em  sirna 
delles  he  de  madeyros  grandes  e fortes  que  c’adaues  que  se 
quizer  cortar  se  pode  fazer  = = dos  soldados  do  prezidio  se 
0 tiram  todos  os  annos  sinquenta  athe  sesenta  pera  andarem 
enibaisci^dos  em  ires,  quatro,  athe  sinquo  jaleus  que  audam 
de  armada  nesta  costa  sayndo  em  Mayo  a Pulopiutt  ou 
aonde  se  (Jeteriuina,  a esperar  os  conzas  de  Goa  para  auisar 
,aoqdb  estil  os  enemigos,  e ajudar  o liurar:  e em  seterabro 
a Junsalit  a esperar  as  do  Negapatam,  sam  Thome,  e tambem 
do  Goa : o em  dezembro  ao  estrey to  de  Sincapura  a esperar 
as  da  China,  e Manilla  pera  ho  raesrao  lini  — Ao  Capitam 
Mor  se  da  huma  ajuda  de  custo  de  cem  cruzados ; e nam  se 
da  aos  soldados  o capdais  dp  jalleas  por  se  erabarcarem 
quartel  nenhum  scn?l  so  se-lhe^pagam  8s  mantimentos  com- 
que  todos  so  ddm  por  satisfeytos  — e sam  as  capitanias  das 
jftlleas  yi'uy  cobissadas  e protendidas  porque  susedo  mnytas 
vozes  lias  muytas  perdis^is  quo  hos  Olandezes  cauzam  has 


270 


APPENDfX. 


nossas  eTnbarcns5is  quo  vS.  de  todas  as  ]mrfce8  leuarem  as 
S846.  jale^s  0 melhor  e lio  pior  quo  som  lio  tornaretn  a sous 
douos,  o que  susedo  parfcicullarmonto  no  que  vem  da  China 
pella  muytavallia  do  quo  saluam  que  he  ouro,  sedas,  e alrnis- 
car:  e tarabem  se  riam  pode  uegar  que  saluil  estas  jaleas 
inuytas  embarcasfiia  e fazendas  : mas  couuoin  muyto  un- 
darem  em  pessoaa  rniiy  dcsyntcrcssadas,  ou  fio  monos  de 
boa  consieusia  que  tarn  raramente  se  acha  em  soldados  ~ Os 
mais  gastos  que  fazom  as  jalloas  sarn  de  marinheyros  porque 
trazera  do  sinquenta  pera  sIma  a respoyto  de  romarem  viuto 
G tres  por  banda,  hum  mais  ou  menos,  a fo^a  os  doua  que 
gouernara  a popa  e proa,  leuando  fAobem  algus  do  sobroso- 
leiito  pollosque  podem  adoeser  ou  cansar,  dasso  a cada  ma- 
rinheyro  huma  para  do  arros  que  he  pouco  mais  de  hum 
alqueyro  cada  mes  e hum  cruzado  de  quatro9ento3  e sosenta 
r^s  todo  0 tempo  que  andam  erabarcados  — e como  huma 
jalea  destas  he  de  sinquoenta  palrnos  do  coraprido  pouco  mais 
ou  inenOvS=  e de  menos  de  sinquo  do  largo,  e quatro  do 
altura  do  pontal,  remada  co  quarcnta  o seis  remos,  fica  a 
mais  ligeyra  embarcassa  quo  arida  no  mar  ; ((ue  para  auisos, 
Bocorroa,  e se  poderem  desuiar  dos  enomigos,  seruem  iniiy 
bem ; e quantas  mais  onveril  rnilhor  soruisso  fizeram  = 
Manda  se  tambern  alguraas  outras  embarcasOis  de  Mallaqua 
com  algus  auizos  como  IkiitTs  muyto  mais  piquenos  que 
jalleaa  que  uam  fazem  gusto  mais  que  ho  dos  marinheyros 
que  fica  dito''6  os  mantimentos  dos  soldados  que  como  em'tprra, 
Ihos  pagft  tam  poucas  vezes  so  embai  cA  por  elles  com  muyta 
vontade ; jerque  tambern  qnando  as  vezes  se  vara  a alguraa 
parte  como  a Pera  e outros  portos  guanhar  hum  quartel  dos 
mercadores,  nem  por  isso  sam  lansadoa  do  presidio,  nem 
deyxa  de  se-lhes-dar  a sua  paga,  i&enara  se  entretanto  la 
anda  Tefes  ; porque  butra  sorte  nenhuna  soldado  aturara 
na  fortaleza  com  tam  poucas  pagas  delRey  s^do  huma  terra 
tam  cara : e antes  so  podo  estranhar  auor  aynda  a^s^  sblrja- 
dos  que  asistam  nella  — — =.* 


APPENDIX. 


271 


Hnma  coaza  pode  roferir  tuolheres  cazadaa  desta 
terra  de  grande  louiior,  e he  que  nenhuma  pedo  a seu  mfid'ido 
nada  pera  ho  gasto  do  ana  cuza  qne  he  ho  conduto;  porquo 
ellaa  por  sy  ho  buscam  com  couzas  quo  fazem  pera  comer, 
que  Sara  as  estallageia  que  ha  iiesta  ^Hdade  o quo  de  ordi- 
nario  andam  suas  escranas  vendendo  pcllas  ruas  — e logb 
desde  pequeninas  as  Vil  suas  raftnis  ^criaudo  neste  exersi.sio 
de  maneyra  que  na  ha  filha  nenhuma  era  caza  de  seu  pay 
que  nara  tenha  sou  cabodal  tambera  separado  pera  isto : e 
assy  quando  na  India  so  na  resscam  tanto  filhas  a respeyto 
de  hos  homes  andarem  rauy  deserii parados  o se  acomodarc 
corn  rauy  poucqa  dotes  possoas  mny  beneraeritas ; Tern  esto 
Vzo  mayor  forsa  nesta  terra  pellas  rezOis  apontadas  ---  — 

As  fazendas  que  h^  nesta  fortolieza  de  Mallaqua  quanto 
has  quo  produze  a terra  sam  rauy  poucas ; e muytas  as  que 
vein  de  fora.  As  quo  ha  na  terra  sam  a prinsipal  Callaym 
algumas  pedras  bazares  e de  porquoespim  aguilla  braua.  0 
(pie  tudo  vem  da  terra  dentro,  e algum  japara  que  he  hum 
pao  verrnelho  pera  tintas  pouquo  meuos  que  ho  do  Brazil; 

0 vem  iho  todas  as  drogas  do  sul  e fazendas  da  China 
e tambem  as  roupas  de  (^krabaya  e costa  de  Choraman- 
del  e ahy  as  bill  buscar  todas  as  nasOis  do  sul  a troco  de 
fazeu(Jas  que  trnziil  com  (pie  ficaua  sendo  o coraervsio  muy 
grande,  e nS.  meuos  os  rendimentos  o que  esta  quazi  de 
todo  (?xtihto : porque  nenhunms  ou  raras  sam  as  nasOis  que  f 
vem  a Mallaqua  a buscar  nada : tendo  tudo  o ha  mister 
nos  olahdezes  --  mas  aynda  co  este  poueo  se  fuzora  viageis 
para  muytas  partes  de  Mallaqua  ==  As  priusipaia  sam  para 
a China,  Manilla,  CochimChina  ==-e  as  de  menos  porto  sam 
para  Patane,  como  Sii\o  esta  oje  do  gerra:  o quando  na, 
se  nauega  muy  ordinarianiente  pera  Camboja,  Champa  e 
pera  todas  estas  partc-s  so  nauega  perA  o sul  que  comessa  a 
veutar  em  MalWqna  de  vinto  da  Abril  athe  todo  Agosto : o 
qi^e  ^e  leha  p(?ra  estas  partes  he  ho  soguiuto  — Para  Patane 
roupas  assy  de  CaiuViaya  eomo  do  toda  a costa  de  Chora*  ' 


272 


▲PPEMDIZ. 


inandel  que  sejam  a aeu  modo  porque  cada>nas8ft  do  sal  tem 
seu^inodO  de  roupaa  = e de  Patane  se  trazem  pataquas^ 
algum  ouro,  boas  podras  bazarea,  arros,  carnea,  legumes, 
asucar  preto  de  cana,  azeytes,  e todo  o genero  de  mantimea- 
tos,  has  milhorep  gallinhaa  e cap(>is  de  todo  o aul. 

Este  reyno  de  Patane  na  se  gouorna  sona  por  inolber  por 
costume  muy  antigo : Esta  ^ento  o sinquoouta  legoas  de 
Mallaqua  por  Costa  e assy  se  pode  vir  por  olla  sem  raousft 
de  norto : partioullarmente  em  balos  quo  sam  como  nauios 
darmada  na  tam  coiiipridos  mas  de  inais  bojo  cO  dous  mas- 
tros  e seus  remos  com  dons  lemes  quo  cbamft  Catrtudes ; e 
em  galles  Malayos  que  sam  inenores  que  as^nossas  Pancho* 
lOis  que  nfi.  sam  gales,  nem  bales,  e inais  p.iressem  ballos 
que  gualles,  co  sens  remos,  e Banti's  do  tamanlio  de  huma 
Manchua  graiidomonte  ligeyros  corn  remos  e dous  mastros : 
que  sft  hos  em  que  mais  ordiiiariamonte  se  nauega  na  costa 
de  Mallaqua  com  marinheyros  Malayos  de  Malaqua  Chris- 
taos  que  leuarn  suas  espingardas  o panellas  de  poluora=. 

De  Camboja  onde  hi  igreja  e padres  da  Coinpanhia,  e o 
Key  muy  to  amigo  dos  Portuguezes,  o ha  rnuyta  ma’doyra 
de  Angellim  rnuyto  grossa,  so  tras  muyto  bom  Bejoim 
amendoado  rnuyta  bom  lacro  de  formijga  : Muyto  arros 
inilhor  e mais  barato  que  ho  de  Bengalla ; a mayor  parte  da 
gento  que  aquy  asiste  sam  JapOis  Christftos,  ,e  Chinas  Val- 
haquos  que  lansarara  de  Manilha  os  Castellanos  p6i'osses,  ou 
elles  fogira  assy  sam  hos  mayores  enomigos  que  temos : 
ha  tabem  neste  reyno  muyto  Callamba  e aguilia  = Na 
costa  de  Cbampa  hH  dous  ou  tres  portos  a que  vain  os  Por- 
tugueses  comersear,  leuft-  boyOis  pretos  da  China,  e algum 
fio  de  ouro;  e resgatft  pao  preto  muyto  mayor  e milhor  que 
ho  de  Mosambique : aqui  Igrejaoe  Christandade  cO  hum 

padre  da  CompaDhiaii^=r 

Esta  adiante  o reyno  de  Cochim  China  e^antes  de  enti’ar 
em  seu  porto  junto  della  esta  huma  llHh  donde  os  padres 
Coinpanhia  tem  Christandade  que  se  chama  Pullo  Cambim : e 


APPENDIX 


273 


entraudo  no  dite  porto  tern  nolle  os  ditos  padres  Tgreja  e 
liilhrisfcandade,  ^ 

Alem  da  dita  Ilha  M dous  portos  neste  royno  ondo 
coraersea  os  portuguezes : hum  era  que  esta  0 Rey ; o outro 
que  chama  Turam.  Tern  muyto  milhor  a colheyta  que  ne- 
nliura  outro;  leu2  se  pera  estes  portos  rnuytas  roupas  do 
8ua  sorte  (oje  esta  a contrato  por  1&  quebrado  pellas  forsas 
do  Capita  de  Mallaqua,  e assy  nam  se  vay  la  sena  da  China). 
Vem  do  dito  reyno  alguma  calaraba,  o mnyta  aguilla,  ncnyta 
cantidado  de  cobre  quo  trazem  Malayos  e Jap5i8  = =.  As 
mais  breues  v^geis  que  se  faze  de  Mallaqua  sam  pera  Pam  p.  sf 
que  he  hum  po^'to  oytenta  legoas  de  Mallaqua  do  dito  Rey 
muyto  amigo  dos  Portuguezes  que  ho  he  tambem  de  Jor  e 
das  ilhas  maritimas  = a este  porto  nauegam  de  Malaqua 
todos  sem  proybesa,  leua  Ihe  roupas  e anfiara,  e de  la  trazem 
ouro  em  poo  da  mesraa  terra  e em  mooda,  pedras  Bazares,  o 
de  porquocspim,  muyto  arros,  aguilla  da  costa,  e algumas 
drogas  que  hos  naturals  do  sul  Ihe  trazem  per  nam  querer 
vir  a Malaqua  =.  Ha  na  mesraa  terra  mais  dous  rios  do 
mesmo  Rey ; onde  se  vay  comersear  e selleua  e tras  o mes- 
mo  = de  fronte  ao  mar  esta  a Ilha  de  Pulo  Tima  piquena 
montuoza,  e muyto  pouoada  de  Malayos : h^  nella  mnyta 
Cassa.de  pombos : hus  animals  como  corsas  muyto  bCns  e 
gordos  que  ohama  Palandos:  muyto  bom  peyxe  fresco; 
ribeyras  de  agoa  exsellente;  muytos  figos;  e breu  = o 
fund^  junto  della  he  de  Vinte  e sinquo  brassas  da  banda  do 
terra  = da  ponta  da  Romania  pera  dentro  esta  o porto  de 
Jor  que  ja  so  vay  pouoando  outra  ves,  em  quo  SO  fazem  oje 
muytos  galles  e outras  embarcasOis  : h&  nelle  muyto  manti- 
monto,  aguilla,  e breu=. 

Da  outra  banda  naquulla  corda  das  ilhas  de  Bintam  = esta 
a qidade  de  Bintam  outra  ves  poudadd  de  nouo  cO  muyta 
gente  e muytas  fortificasf^is  por  amor  de  Achem.  Deste 
Rqy  Re  Jor  e Para  ha  outras  Ilhas  por  aquy  poiioada's,  do 
pouca  considorasJl,  *e  nollas’  mesmas  junto  ao  estreyto  do 

VOL.  III.  ^ 


274 


APPENDIX. 


Sincapura  esta  o porto  de  Bulla  muyto  pouoado  de  Malayos, 
fre(fuentado  sobre  maneyra  de  muytos  mercadores  de^todo 
8ul  onde  vem  vender  suas  drogas  de  que  rezulta  grande  rendi- 
mento  a ElRey  do  Pam,  o que  fazem  sem  vir  a Mallaqua 
pellas  grandes  |iramas  que  hos  capitals  daquella  fortalleza 
Vzam  com  elles  cm  Ihe  toraarem  ns  fazendas  por  presso  muy 
ynferior  ao  quo  corro  sa  terra  o assy  1 ho  fazorom  taobem 
leuar  a sua  moeda  muy  ordinaria  om  todas  as  i^idades  e for- 
tallezas  deste  estado  e qiie  as  tcin  chegado  a igual  mizeria  de 
que  hos  mesmos  Olatulozes.;  e M tan  to  assy  ein  Mallaqua 
que  hos  Christaos  quo  va  a estcs  portos  res?gatar  algumas 
destaa  fazendas  lhas  toma  o Capitam  por  perdidas  cO  muytas 
afrontas : e algiis  porisso  as  metem  de  noyte  om  caza  e 
auiza  ao  Veedor  da  fazenda  para  pagarc  os  direytos,  cauza 
poronde  se  deseucaminha  muytas  — = 

Da  outra  banda  desta  flha  na  costa  da  Sumatra  esta  ho 
porto  do  Yambe  Rio  caudallozo,  fundo  e do  npressada 
corrento,  onde  os  Olandozes  sam  muy  resscbidos  o tern  sua 
feytoria  e re^gatam  gram  copia  de  piraenta  = Logo  mais 
para  Mallaqua  pouqua  distasia  deste  porto  esta  o grande 
Rio  Andregy  donde  tambcm  tirarn  os  Olandezes  gram  copia 
de  pimenta—  ha  mais  outros  Rios  ern  quo  14  escalla  de 
pimenta,  e aguilla  om  que  so  na  falla  particullarmento  por 
ser  de  pouca  cOsiderassa  = = Junto  ha  Ilha  do  SA,bam 
que  esta  mais  pera  Mallaqua  esta  o porto  de  SiacS  tauibem 
de  Malayos  .onde  todas  as  Luas  nouas  e cheas  ha  grcmdes 
feyras  de  todas  as  couzas  do  sul,  ouro,  pedras  de  presso,  e 
Bazares,  Aguilla,  Calamba,  o outras  muytas  couzas,  e manti- 
mentos  = deste  porto  por  hum  Rio  que  vom  sayr  de  fronte 
do  Malaqua  esta  a boca  de  Bancallcs  na  Samatra  da  outru 
• 386.  banda  de  Mallaqua  aonde  ha  todas  as  Luas  a mesma  feyra 
que  alem  das  couzas  n'eilgridas  tern  muyta  came  de  porquo 
fresca  e salgada;  e de  huas  oiias  do  pefxe  sauel  quo 
cham^  Trubo  de  quo  ha  em  Mallaqua  grande  e:«(f]gediei(^e 
pera  todas  as  partes,  Esta  aquy  na  boon  de  Bancalles  o rio  ' 


APPENDIX. 


275 


Jas  galles  de  qu®  de  tndo  ho  senhor  ElRoy  da  Pa  quo  foy 
jompi'e  emperadop  do  sul.  0 ostrcy to  do  Sinquapum  era^ue 
atras  fallamos  quo  he  onde  oa  Olandezos  vem  esperar  as 
embarcasOis  dos  Portuguezes  que  vera  da  China,  Manilla-, 
Macassa  e de  todo  o Archipellago  de  Ma\uco  tern  muytoa 
canais  e tarn  estreytos  que  em  partes  yam  as  embarcasOia 
tocando  c5  as  vergas  nos  aruores  du  terra  onde  as  correntes 
das  mares  sum  grandissimas : a agoa  posto  que  fuiida  muyto 
clara  de  maneyra  que  vcm  as  poyxos  andar  nella  os  quaia 
os  mercadores  (pio  vam  nas  embarcasois  compru  aos  Sallctes 
que  sao  os  que  abitam  esto  estreyto  yndo  o peyxe  nadundo 
na  agoa,  e elles  o vendom,  e vara  logo  em  ballDis  muyto 
lygeyros  om  que  viuem  cO  suas  famillias  o fisga  ho  peyxe  e o 
trazem.  Sam  esto  Saletoa  gente  pessima  e particullarmento 
contra  os  Portuguezes ; sa  velhacoa  o traydoros  as  raayores 
espias  que  tem  hos  Olandezes  ponpio  onde  ciuor  que  esteja 
a nossa  embarcassa  das  may  las  parage  is  que  aly  hii  dam 
logo  auizo  aos  Olandezes  e os  leua  e eucaraiuha  a ella : de 
eorte  que  tern  cauzado  as  mais  das  perdesuis  das  nossas 
frotns ; e isto  respey to  do  os  Olandezes  Ihe-darem  grandes 
dutos  de  tudo  ho  que  assy  apanlul  E assy  conuem  muyto 
que  as  nossas  armadas  de  jaleas  e iiauios  que  vam  a estes 
estreytoB  esperar  as  ditas  frotas  fassam  toda  a gerra  possiuol 
a estes  Sallet^s  para  os  euxotar  dcstas  parageis  — . 

As  viageis  do  mais  iniportansia  quo  se  fazern  do  Mallaqua 
saru^como  fica  dito  pora  a China,  aonde  so  leuauam  do  Mal- 
laqua tbdas  as  drogas  do  sul ; quo  ja  ojo  ufl  vam  mais  que 
alguma  pimenta  e ponco  on  uenhum  crauo  quo  a nos,  e 
massa,  esta  em  poder  dos  Olandezes : sendo  souhores  das 
Ilhas  de  Banda  de  donde  deytara  hos  proprios  naturais  que 
anda  vagamundos  por  todo  o sul  dezeijaiido  alguma  ocaziam 
pera  se  vingarem  o recuperaroin  suas  ^rras  ^ 0 mais  que 
leuam  pera  a China  ho  ho  que  Iho  vay  da  India,  e junta- 
xpeftto  j«)ra  Manilla  lio  que  se  tras  de  la  ja  fica  dito  He 
^ regimento  de  Mallaqua  qu«  nenhuma  embarcusa  quo  venha 


276 


APPENDIX. 


Banda  do  dito  estreyto  passe  sem  tomarHallaqua  e fajer 
aly  direytos  de  tado  ho  que  trouxer  de  qiie  paga  de|^  pop 
^ento,  e dous  a ^idade  pera  fortoficassam  e artilharia : e ja 
ODue  algumas  que  passando  sem  tomarom  esta  fortalleza 
fora  julgadas  por  pordidas  = 

^as-se  tambem  viugom  de  Mallaoa  pera  o Macasa  que  he 
huma  llba  que  osta  trezentas  legoas  de  Mallaqua  ao  Yeste, 
de  hum  Eey  Mouro  que  sabe  muy  hem  fallar  Portugues,  e 
tern  muytos  em  suaa  terras  e he  grauJe  seu  amigo,  o que 
Ihe  leuam  na  sa  mais  que  ;»‘oupas  j e se  trazem  as  drogaa 
que  aly  vom  vender  os  uaturais  do  sul,  tendo  a terra  em  sj 
muy  to  mantimento,  o tartaruga,  e daquy  he  de  que  prinsi- 
palmente  se  prouo  Malluquo;  para  esta  Ilha  se  fas  tambom 
viagem  de  todo  ho  estado : ha  nella  Igrejas  cO  padres  que 
admiuisti^  os  sacramentos  aos  Portuguezes  que  aly  asistem 
e vam  e vem=  Tern  este  Key  prometido  de  na  dar  porto 
em  sua  terra  a Olandezes  como  Toy  e assy  tern  em  sua  terra 
Denamarcos,  0 Ingrezes«=  Sendo  este  Rey  e todo  sou 
reyno  gentioS  mandou  pedir  a Mallaqua  hum  padre  para 
Ihe  mostrar  0 que  era  a ley  dos  Christaos  porque  se  Ihe 
paresesse  bem  a tomaria:  dizem  quo  tardou  em  yr  mais 
do  que  premetia  couza  tarn  ymportante  = e assy  quando 
tinha  chegado  primoyro  hum  marinheyro  de  hum  pataxo 
que  chamauS,  Lucar  Mouro  que  Iho  ensinou  a^sua  ley  0 Ihe 
pareseo  tarn  bem  que  logo  a tomou  = 

De  Mallaqua  a Pera  sam  quarenta  legoas  por  costa  pera  a 
banda  de  Leste  foy  este  Rey  vassallo  do  Sua  Mag^^biuytos  ^ 
annos,  e pagaua  de  pareas  hum  grande  cantidade  de  callaym 
ha  tres  annos  que  Iho  negou  as  pareas  a quo  responde  que 
bo  liurem  do  Aohem  e que  entd.  pagara  as  pareas  e sera  vas- 
sallo  de  Sua  Mag^  porque  com  as  i^auytas  armadas  cO  que 
ho  Achem  anda  de  oidinario  nestes  mares  da  de  ordinario 
nas  terras  deste  Roy  ho  destroe,  e Ihe  catius^  sua  gente  de 
maneyra  que  responde  ho  Bey  que  mu^  bem  conhesse  de 
* quanta  mais  ymportansia  Iho  ser  sogeyto  a Sua  Mag^® 


277 


APPIKBIX:. 

do  qae  ao  Aohem:  mas  qne  nam  tern  poder  pera  rezistlr  a 
este  tirano,  e a thuyta  forsa  qae  tern,  o na  lha  dando  Sua 
Mag4®  forsado  ha  de  proourar  ho  remedio  de  seas  reynos 
com  se-lhe-auasallar  6 pagar  as  pareas  que  pagaua  a Sua 
Mag^®  B aynda  assy  teue  com  que  rezester  a hua  armada 
noasa  que  ho  hia  caatigar  =*=  Tern  em  sens  reynos  grandcs 
minas  de  Callaym^que  he  ho  metal  qne  hca  dito  de  sorte 
• que  sayra  dellas  todos  os  annos  de  sinquo  para  sois  mil 
quintais  de  Callaym  ; os  quais  antigamente  vinham  todos  os 
mais  delles  pera  Mallaqua  e oje  nam  vem  a tersa  parte  ho 
mais  vam  pera  ho  Achem  donde  os  Olandezes  o leuam,  e o 
trazem  para  a India  cO  grandes  ganhos  ==. 

A feytoria  que  ho  capitam  de  Mallaqua  tiuha  em  Pera 
era  donde  tiraua  o mayor  ynteresse  que  oje  na  h^l : e por 
estas  6 outras  couzaa  descahio  tanto  esta  fortalleza  e capi- 
taniai  que  nft  ouue  prouido  que  quizese  eutrar  nella  no  anno 
de  seisqentos  trinta  e tres : e assy  foy  entrar  hum  capitam 
mandado  pello  Visorrey* 


278 


APPENDIX. 


DESCRIPTION  OP  THE  ISLAND  OP  GOA,  FROM  PEDRO  BARRKTTO  DB 
EBSENDK’s  J^LIVRO  DO  E8TADO  DA  INDIA  ORIENTAL'^ 

Sloam  Mantiscnpty  197. 

j, — 

ILHA  DE  GOA. 

c 

DESCRIPSAM  DE  TLn4  DE  GOA  E TOD  AS  SUAS  ANEXAS. 

Ilha  dk  Goa  Metropollj  e cabessa  de  todct  ho  estado  da 
India  de  que  Sua  Mag‘l®  he  senhor  esta  em  §.ltura  de  quinze 
graos  e quarenta  e sinquo  menutos.  Tem  do  comprimento 
duas  legoas  de  sircuy  to  e do  largura  huma  e em  partes  pouco 
mais.  Esta  pegada  c6  a terra  firme  do  Concam  do  Balla- 
gatte  he  muy  freaca  e chea  de  muytas  ortas  e palmares  com 
agoas  muy  boas  e comerseada  de  todo  oriente,  porque  como 
^cabessa  cohcorrem  a ella  por  mar  e terra  todas  suas  fazendas 
e riquezas,  e della  so  espalham  por  todo  o mundo.  E antes 
que  enlremos  em  dar  raaia  particullar  reza  desta  Ilha  e 
^idado  de  Goa  sera  bern  quo  ho  fassaraos  dos  fortes  passes 
com  que  na  sua  entrada  e por  toda  ella  esta  forteficada : — 

DESCRIPSAM  DO  FORTE  DE  KOSSA  S[ENHPRA  DO'  dABO. 

Entrando  pella  pouta  do  Nossa  Senhora  do^'^Sabo  pera 
dentro  da  bawa  do  Goa  so  a de  afastar  alguma  couza  da  dita 
ponta  porque  lansa  ao  mar  huma  rostinga  de  pedraeP'ouberta 
do  agoa  pouco  mais  de  mea  legoa,  iica  da  banda  jo  sal  o 
outeyro  aonde  esta  a Igreja  de  Nossa  Senhora  do  Cabo  no 
mais  alto  delle^  de  frades  Capuchos  Becoletos  o qaal  esta 
leuantado  da  superfisie  do  orizonte  ^aetenta  brassas  fioando 
a dita  Igreja.  em  h«m  ierro^o  de  sinquoenta  de  roda  na 
qual  ha  tres  sistemas  que  leuam  trinta  mil  p^s  de  agoa 
fica  flrfostado  da  rais  do  outeyro  pera  afma  da  banda  damar 
distausia  de  vinte  brassas  hum  c forte  pera  onde  se  Vay  por 


Al’PfiNDIX. 


279 


huma  estrada  cwberta  quo  comesaa  eiu  huma  calheta  quo 
fica  detras  do  rrlesmo  monte  da  banda  do  dentro,  de^’mil 
passes  de  coropritio  athe  cliogar  a huma  porta  do  dito  forte 
por  ondo  se  eutra  a liua  plataforma  de  9Qm  passes  do  com-, 
prirnento  e vinte  sinquo  de  lavgura  aereada  pella  Ijauda  do 
mar  de  hum  parapoyto  do  seis  palmoa  do  altura  com  ac’s 
liigares  para  outrastantas  bombardaa  : o pella  do  monte  quo 
Ihe  fica  muyto  alto  e sobransoyro  tern  huas  sote  cazas  do 
sobrado  cubertas  do  terrados  bastantes  pora  viuer  nolla 
qualquer  pcssoa  quo  possa  seruir  de  capitam  — E embayso 
tern  no  andar  da  ditaprassa  doze  cazas  ein  quo  podem  viiier 
soldados  piais,  e bombardeyros:  o nemhuinas  das  ditas  cazas 
estS.  aynda  de  todo  acabadas  Nam  asisto  neste  forte  quo 
chama  “Nossa  Senhora  do  Cabo^’  Capitam  nem  soldado 
algum,  0 so  tern  hum  negro  que  ho  vigia:  o tom  na  ditta 
plataforma  quatro  pessas  do  bronze  ein  sens  repayros  do 
quinze  athe  vinte  libras  do  pillouro  do  ferro  E como  a 
vigia  dos  Trades  emsima  he  continua  tern  no  dito  Connoiito 
monisOis  bastantes  pera  as  ditas  quatro  pessas  de  artillmria. 

Auisam  de  qualquer  couza  que  paresse^  uo  mar  pera  so  f 
prouer  logo  do  capitam  bombardeyros  c gente  como  so  faz 
porem  nam  deyxa  de  estar  este  forte  otferessido  a so  arroy- 
nar  com  a muyta  agoa  que  polio  ynuorno  dosso  do  dito 
monte  que  fica  arroynaudo  as  paredos  das  ditas  cazas. 

3|i  ;|{  >|c  jf:  sfe 

FORTALLFZA  DE  PANCHM. 

Polio  liio  asima  hum  qiiarlo  do  logon  do  furto^do  Guaspar 
Dias  esta  o Gastello  do  i^angim  no  qual  so  fizonl  apozentos 
pera  os  Visorreis  estarem  qiiaudo  vam  a barra  dospedir  as 
armadas  e naos  do  royno  por  ficarom  mais  perto  e quaudo 
he  nesesavio  em  qualquer  ocazla  de  onemigos  estare  mais 
perto  da  barra  ==  Estam  feytos  apozontos  a borda  do  Rio 
e cazas  muy  bastantds  e hum  cais  ondo  dosembarca  pora  as 
mesmas  cazas  o poato  quo  ElRoy  quaiiclo  se  fizera  na  era  do 


280 


APPEM0TX. 


seis  9eDto8  e quinze  se  ouue  por  mal  seruif^D  e mandaua  que 
as  pagasse  o Visorrey  dom  Jer[ony]mo  de  A^euedo  = despois 
0 ouue  por  bem  parcssendo  hama  das  inolhores  couzas  que 
tinha  o estado  como  de  feyto  o aonde  quando  os  Visorreis 
la  na  estft,  tern  a lidade  hum  homem  Portugues  por  .ter  cuy- 
dado  das  ditas  cazas  e conserto  dellas  a que  pagd.  seis 
cada  mes  ^ Estam  em  Pangim  obra  de  trinta  cazaa  entre 
terreas  e de  Sobrado  alguas  muyto  grandes  e fermozas  de 
Portugueses  de  Goa  e outras  dos  quo  fazera  aly  sua  abitassft 
de  que  tarn  bem  parte  eatil  po  longo  do  Rio  c6  ortas  e pal- 
mares do  recreasam  e rendimento  e assy  vft  continuando 
algumas  cazas  athe  Sancta  Inis  que  esta  mais  pera  a barra 
e daby  athe  Xossa  Senhora  do  Cabo  aonde  estS,  oyto  cazas 
assy  de  moradores  de  Goa : como.  de  algiis  velhos  ermitOis 
Treseyros  da  Ordem  de  Sam  Fran9i8co ; que  estam  e viuein 
, 260.  aly  retiradoa  a sombra  dos  Kecolletos  do  dito  Conuento  — 
Ha  em  Pangim  doze  ou  trezo  almadias  compridas  e estreytas 
quo  leua  des  e doze  remos  por  banda  que  seruc  de  leuar 
auiso  a qualquer  parte  e prinsipalmente  ao  norte,  e tam- 
bem  pessoas  e fazendas  de  pouco  vollumo  porquo  por  sua 
muyta  ligeyreza  uauegam  sem  armadas  porquo  nam  vam 
sogeytas  a pares  posto  que  ja  acontessoo  tomarem  algumas. 
0 gasto  que  esta  fortalleza  de  Pangim  fas  a fazenda  real,  a 
qual  na  he  mais  que  hua  torre  antigamente  al^  que  oje  esta 
no  meo  das  cazas  em  que  ha  artilharia  ne  codlii  defensa- 
vel  he  0 segukite,  etc. 

PASSO  DE  RIBANDAR. 

Adiante  de  Pangim  hca  huma  ponto  que  a ^^dade  de 
Goa  maudou  fazer  por  mandado  Conde  do  Liuhares 
V isorrey  pera  passaf|^izi«de  hifhi  brasso  de  Rio  do  caminho 
que  vay  de  Goa  feyta  sobre  vinte  e oyto  a^cos  de  pedra  e 
\ 2606.  cal  noiay to  forte  e fermoza : da  qual  sa  tay  continuando  hum 
^ fermozo  cais,  ou  caminho  por  meio  do  Bio  de  quazl  huma  < 


APPENDIX. 


281 


legoa  de  comprido  obra  insigae  c6  que  fica  o dito  camynho 
tnuy  fassil  pera  qaalquer  ocazia  apressada  como  ordinAria- 
merite  acontese  o que  nam  era  antigamento  autos  de  ae 
fazer  eata  obra  porqiio  so  nam  podia  yr  sena  por  mar  em 
manchuas  que  primeyro  quo  se  achaasepi  pera  qualquer 
suseso  apresado;  Era  nessessario  pera  isso  muyto  tempo /e 
tambera  ae  ficam  cobraiido  buns  pcidassos  do  varzeas  muyto 
grandes  que  lio  Condo  de  Linhares  Vizorrey  aplicou  pera 
sustonto  do  Ospital  da  Piedade  que  elle  edificou  e ynstetahio. 

Esta  neste  porto  e paragomMlo  Ribandar  hum  passo  c5 
bum  balluarto^piqucno  do  des  passes  do  coinprido  e seis  de 
largo  onde  o^a  somento  hum  sino  de  vegia  quo  como  a 
nrtilharia  aquy  narn  seruo  mais  que  pera  lios  da  terra  se 
pode  por  cada  ues  quo  for  nesscssaria  — ficam  Iho  pegadaa 
as  cazRS  do  Capitam  ou  tanadar,  o mnytas  oiitraa  ha  roda  era 
que  viuora  Portuguesos  e Canaris  cT)  huma  Igreja  quo  por 
todos  senX  passaiite  do  vinto,  e muytos  palmares  do  huma  e 
outra  banda. 

PASSO  DE  DAUGV. 

Passando  pella  (^idado  do  Goa  iiido  polio  Rio  asima  de 
propia  parte  em  terra  da  mesma  Illia  esta  ho  passo  do 
Daugim  chamado  por  outro  norne  da  Madro  de  D[eo]3 : 
polio  mosteyro  que  llie-fica  poguadodc  Capuclios  Recolletos:  p 
Nil  ho  cste  passo  inai.s  que  humas  cazas  graades  sobradAdas 
onde  mbra  ho  capitam  ou  tanadar  do  dito  passo  = Na  IiA 
nolle  artilharia  nonhuraa  mais  que  hiis  do  pet)  de 
fazendo  conta  do  se-llie-por  quando  for  nossesaria,  porbayxo 
tern  huma  porta  per  onde  entnl  e saem  os  quo  passam  pello 
dito  passo  de  huma  prra  outra  parte  em  raanclmas  quo  ha 
de  vigia  e al madias  pora  passagein'da'gente  e para  fazerem 
chegar  todas  embarcasOis  a registar  no  dito  passo  se 
agazo,  0 ham  querem  fazer  = Do  fronte  da  porta  (Jb  dito 
passo  a borda  do  Rio  pegddo  na  agoa  esta  lium  balluarto 

VOL.  HI.  ^ 


282 


APPENDIX. 


razo  coadmdo  quo  tern  perto  de  duas  brasas  de  altura,  e de 
rod#  tem  vinte  e sinquo  pasos  andantes  no  qual  se  poem 
artilharia  quando  ho  necessaria  pera  qualquer  ocazi2L=  E 
da  ponta  das  cazas  do  passo  coraessa  o muro  quo  vay  cor- 
rondo  pella  Ilha  qm  roda  ao  longo  do  dito  Rio  muyto  grando 
c^asso  atlio  do  fronto  de  8ain  Joilo  Bautista  onde  se  afasta 
do  Rio  e vay  cOtiniiando' pella  terra  dentro  da  Ilha  como  se 
vora  da  planta=  Tern  este  muro  de  altura  em  partes  tres 
brasses  e em  partes-  monos,  o em  ontras  mais  c6  sens 
balluartcs  a espassos  poi*a  defenderem  os  panos  de  muro 
que  ha  entre  hus  e outros  posto  quo  de  Satn  JoiX  Ihiutista 
athe  de  fronte  do  Bargany  onde  ja  chogaua.  ho  dito  muro 
esta  muy  ymperfeyto  e com  muytas  quobradas=:  E nara 
foy  esta  obra  mais  por  dianto  por  se  entender  ora  do  pouco 
effeyto  assy  por  ho  sircuyto  ser  muy  grande  o doscompra- 
sado  hauer  mister  mais  do  siuquoenta  mil  homes  pora  ho 
defenderem  como  por  tlcar  muy  deslante  da  Cidado  e aynda 
dos  mais  afastados  arrabaldes  della  e tem  se  alcaiisado  que 
coni  ho  dinhbyro  que  se  gastou  nesta  obra  so  pudera  tor 
forteficado  a (J^idade  muyto  bem  o alem  della  a Ilha  toda  em 
roda  quero  dizer  naquellas  partes  onde  tinha  ncsesidade  do 
forleficassam  e assy  foy  diuheyro  perdido  o que  nella  so 
gastou  = Tern  este  passo  do  Daugy  capittam  Portugues  e 
fidalgo  a quern  so  paga  sou  soldo  e vonsimeuto,  : mas  ho  que 
ho  sustenta  ho  os  prois  epercalsos  e lagimas  que  fee  importil 
muyto  =:  ' ‘ 

♦ ♦ * ♦ ^ “ 

PASSO  SECO  CHAMADO  DE  SAM  liRAS. 

Passado  ho  passo  de  Daugy  indo  correndo  a Ilha  de  Goa 
a roda  ao  longo  do  Rio  o muro  ^ segue  o passo  soquo 
chamado  de  Bam  Bims  «=  Tem  hum  balluarte  grande  de 
pedra  e cal  pegado  no  dito  muro : onde  est^m  tres  pessas 
de  artilharia  de  Bronze  em  seus  repayros  huma  d«  desoito 
liuras  e as  uutras  de  des  de  piMouro  de  ferro  este  passo  fee 


APPENDIX. 


283 


muy  perigozo  e thegado  bUs  teiTas  do  Idolcam  e de  mare 
vazia  so  pode  passar  a pee  enxuto  e a este  respeyto  te^ra  a 
guarda  e vigia  quo  abayxo  se  vera  a qiiom  se  paga  da 
fazenda  real  o quo  se  segue^  etc. 

♦ ♦ ♦ j|e  :i  ♦ 

PASSO  DE  SANCTIAQO  POR  OUTl^)  NOME  BENASTAPJM. 

Continuando  ao  longo  do  mcsmo  Rio  e muro  adiante  aF.26: 
vista  deste  passo  seco  osfca  bo  passo  de  Sanctiago  o qual 
tern  no  mesmo  muro  hum  balluarto  muyto  forte  o bem 
feyto  em  que  estani  sinquo  possas  do  artilbaria  huma  de* 
ferro  mourisca*  muyto  grande  quo  tira  pillouro  de  pedra 
de  disfonue  grandeza ; e as  quatro  do  bronze  que  fora  dos 
galleCis  de  doze  athe  desoyto  liuras  do  pollouro  de  ferro  = 
Pera  se  sayr  ao  Rio  se  bA  de  passar  por  sinquo,  ou  seis 
portas  que  estam  debayxo  da  Abobada  das  cazas  do  capitam 
ao  longo  do  dito  balluarte  quo  todas  em  tempo  de  gerra  erS. 
de  Rastilbo,  ou  alsaptl  que  se  fecba  do  alto  da  A bobada  para- 
bayxo  cayndo  por  encayxes  de  pedra;  e se  abrem  leuan tan- 
dose  do  alto  da  abobada  com  mollinetes  com  que  ficaua 
fortissima  a entrada  do  dito  passo,  etc. 

3|C  ♦ ♦ ♦ * 

PA^^iy  DE  SAM  JOA  BAUTISTA  : POR  OUTRO 
NOME  CARAMBOLLIM. 

' Ao  passo  do  Sanctiago  em  roda  da  Ilha  de  Goa  so  segue 
outro  passo  que  cbama  sam  JojT  Bautista  e porputro  nome 
Carambollim  porque  csta  em  hua  aldea  desto  propria  nomo 
0 qual  nam  tern  Balluarto  nem  artilbaria  alguma  fazendo 
conta  de  se-lhe-leuar  e^  por  no  muro  quando  seja  nossessa-  p 
rio  = para  sua  guarda  e vegia,  tern  bum  Tanadar  que  be 
0 mesmo  que  ^apitam  soldados  naiques  o piAis  cujo  numero 
0 0 ^ue  cada  bum  se  paga  da  fazenda  real  se  segue,  etc. 


284 


APPENDIX. 


PaSsO  DE  SAM  LOURENSO  FOR  OUTRO  NOME  AOASSA.YM. 

Adiante  do  passo  de  Sam  Joam  Bautista  muyto  grande 
distansia  pello  Rio  abayxo  quazi  de  fronte  da  barra  de  Mor- 
Jifugfl  e llha  de  Salsete  cata  o passo  de  Sam  Lourenso  qlie 
por  outr?  r^omo  se  chamji  Agassaym  porque  esta  em  buma 
aldea  do  mesmo  nomo  e he  o por  onde  se  passa  para  as 
terras  de  Salsete.  Tern  por  fortalleca  huas  cazas  do  sobrado 
em  que  viue  o capita  sem  outra  defen sa  de  balluarte,  muro, 
nem  artilharia:  fica  muyto  desuiado  da  Qidado  porque^esta 
quazi  no  fim  da  llha  de  Goa,  etc. 

^ )|c  •> 

263.  ILIIA  de  jua. 

A llha  de  J uA  esta  outre  a llha  de  Goa  o a terra  firme 
pera  a banda  Nordesto,  he  de  pouco  menos  de  hunia  legoa 
de  comprimento ; e hum  tiro  de  falcA  de  largura  onde  mais  = 
Tern  na  cabessa  quo  comessa  da  banda  de  Goa  nouo  moradas 
de  cazas  de  I^ortuguezes  de  pcdra  e cal,  muy  boas  e fermozas 
quo  sam  de  moradores  de  Goa  = Junto  a ellas  esta  a 
Igreja  de  Sancto  Esteuam  que  he  frogezia,  onde  asiste  por 
vigario  hum  clerigo  de  casta  Canarim  ==  eomo  sam  todas 
as  mais  das  Igrejas  da  llha  do  Goa  e suas  adjasentcs  = 
Excepto  algumas  que  hos  tem  Trades  do  Sam  T)omingos,  ou 
de  Sancto  Agostinho:  e as  de  Bardes  dos  do  oam  Fran- 
cisco — B as  (lo  Salsete  de  padres  da  companhia  de  Jeshs  = 
Porto  da  esta  llha  de  Juil  hA  mil  o dusontos  Cunarij^  ontre 
08  quais  os^oyto9ento8  sam  do  armas,  e a milhor  gento  do 
todas  as  demais  Ilhas,  e da  de  Goa : e acodem  cO  ellas  todas 
as  veses  que  samt^hamados Esta  llha,  a de  Dinar,  Choram, 
e a das  mftgas  sam  sogeytas  ao  capitam  de  Naroa. 

9 n ^ 

ILHA  DE  DIUAR.  ^ 

A llha  de  Diuar  fica  de  fronte  da  ^^idade  de  3oa^  po^a 
a banda  do  Norte  a qnal  fas  o mefemo  Rio  cO  outro  brasso  que  ' 


APPENDIX. 


286 


a serca,  tera  de*  comprimento  huma  legoa,  e de  largo  hum 
quarto  e em  partes  menos,  esta  nella  o castello  e pas^o  de 
Naroa  de  quo  abayxo  se  fara  meusH  da  banda  de  Leste  da 
terra  firme  dos  Mouros:  Tern  eato  Ilha  em  sy  passante 
de  quatrc  mil  moradores  ontre  os  quais  auera  dous  mil  de 
armas  e as  tom,  e os  mais  destos  so  ocupa  em  cultiuar  ^is 
terras  : e outros  sam  pescadores  inaa  todos  Christaos^  h^  nella 
tres  freguezias  cO  sens  Vigarios  c5  as  ordinaries  quo  adiaute 
se  dira. 

PASSO  DE  -NAUOA. 

Passando  pella  Qidado  do  Goa  iudo  pello  Rio  asima  vol- 
tando  sobro  a’ mil  esquerda  na  ponta  da  Ilha  de  Dinar  que 
fica  do  fronto  da  terra  firme  dos  Mouros  como  atras  so  dis 
esta  hum  castello  antigo  que  chama  Naroa,  pegado  ao  qual  f.  2r 
esta  as  cazas  do  Capitam  bastantos  pera  se  agasalhar  cO  sua 
famillia  = Ao  pee  do  castello  on  torro  esta  huma  caza  no 
Rio  fundada  sobre  arcos  ondo  so  vegia  de  mais  perto  as 
embarcasfiis  quo  passS,  = A artilharia  que  tern  oste  torre 
sam  quatro  fal9oi8  e hum  berso  porque  tambem  ella  ml  ho 
capas  de  artilharia  do  mais  porte  = Estam  junto  a esto 
passo  des  cazas  de  pedra  e cal  terreas  ==  onde  viuem  cazados 
Portuguezes,  etc. 

' ;|t  ^ t ♦ 

> ILHA  DAS  MANGAS. 

A’ Ilha  das  Mangas  be  hua  ilhotu  que  osta^ntre  esta  Ilha 
de  Diu^r  e a terra  firme  dos  Mouros  e a Ilha  de  Jua  tern  de, 
comjprimento  hum  tiro  de  pessa  e pouco  menos*  do  largo  = 

Na  tern  mais  que  palmares  e mangueyras  tern  humas  cazas 
cO  huas  torrinhas  do  dono  della  que  Ibe  serue  de  fortes  e 
oytenta  canaris  Chris^aios  quo  a cultiufi.  e guards : e nam 

tern  Igreja.  * • * 

ILHA  DE  CHORAM.  F.S 

0 

Pc^uAdo  ha  Ilha  de  Diuar  deuedida  so  por  hum  brAsso  de 
Rio  ticu  a Ilha  do  Chorain  \)ora  a banda  de  Noroeste  a qual  * 


286 


APPUNDU. 


tern  huma  Icgoa  o hum  quarto  de  cOprido  o mais  do  diias  de 
rodaf*:  muyto  mais  abitada  quo  a de  Dinar  d assy  chega  a 
ter  perto  de  quinze  mil  almas  dos  quais  sam  de  sinquo  para 
sois  mil  homes  de  gerra  sam  todos  Pescadores  e lauradoros 
e algiis  marinheyros ; nam  tem  esta  Ilha  de  Choram  fortal- 
leki  nem  balluarte  algiim  que  a defenda  mais  que  a mesma 
gente  que  he  a mais  rioa,  e luzida  de  todas  as  Ilhas.  Tern 
om  sy  duas  Igrojas  e muytos  palmares,  mangas,  e terras 
de  arros. 


CIDADE  JiE  GOA. 

A ^idade  de  Goa  esta  lansada  ao  longo  do  Rio  que  fas 
Ilha  comessando  as  cazas  della  do  Panellim  athe  Madro  de 
D[eo]s  era  quo  entrft  hos  arrabaldos  ncsto  comprimento  que 
sera  de  dous  tersos  de  legoa  : A largura  he  desde  ho  Rio 
athe  Nossa  S[enh]ora  da  Lus  lansando  aynda  algumas  cazas 
mais  adiante  the  junto  ao  outoyro  de  Bargany : quo  serfto 
mil  seisqentos  passos  de  largura  o pell  os  outros  dous  lados 
dubanda  do  comprimento,  fica  o grosso  da  (^idade  entre  os 
dous  outeyros  de  Sancto  Agostinho,  e Nossa  S[enh]ora  do 
Monte  que  ficAo  Leste  Oeste  hum  do  outro,  Sancto  Agostinho 
para  a banda  de  Veste  e Nossa  S[enh]ora  de  Monte  para  a de 
Leste,  e dista  hum  do  outro  por  linha  recta  dous  mil  passos 
e pello  oblicar  cO  as  dissidas  e sobidas  dous  mil  e trezentos 
cada  hum  destes  outeyros  fica  caualleyro  ha  i^ida^e  de  forma 
que  estando  rfrtilharia  em  qualquer  defies  a poderft  "com 
fassillidade  arrazar  = Os  fogos  quo  hA  nesta  (^id^^e  de 
Goa  dentro^^nos  ditos  lernites  sam  tres  mil  e quinhentos  a 
fora  08  Conuetos  dos  quais  os  oy to^entos  sam  de  Portuguezes 
cazados  que  hus  por  outros  tem  dous  escrauos  que  possft 
tomar  armas  = sendo  que  conhessjy  muytos  que  tinha  a 
desaseis  e a vinte:  laiait  tabe  algtis  nA  tinha  nenhu:  Os 
mais  defies  sam  Cafres")  e de  outras  nasO^  da  India  = 
Haleuf  destes  tem  hos  ditos  Portuguezes  cazadbs^oytp 
pessoas  entre  escrauos  Inutcis  qiib  chamA  Bichos  o escrauas, 


APPKKDII. 


287 


on  iiegras  = adiertindose  tambem  que  posto  que  ha  miiytos 
quo  n2U)  tem  ^essoa  nonhuma  destes  Inuteis  = h^  cazsf  em 
que  ha  vinte  escrauas  e mais  = Todos  os  ditoa  cazadoa 
tem  inuytaa  armaa  com  que  omam  suaa  cazas,  assy  cabidea 
de  lansas,  azagnayas  e partazanaa  como  taipbera  espingardas 
de  pederneyra  o murra  de  maneyra  quo  tem  armaa  pera  ^y  f.  25« 
e seus  eacranos  e so  Iho  podora  faHar  poluora  e ballas  que 
uft  tem  de  portaa  a dentro  = 0 mais  nninero  de  fogos  que 
hti  nesta  (Jidade  sam  de  cazados  prettos  Cbristaos  Canaria  e 
de  outras  nasf^is  da  India  que  tambom  tem  algus  eacrauos 
de  armaa  quo  sempro  sera  a metade  do  dito  nuinero  muytos 
destes  sam  ofh^siais  mccauicos : hos  dous  mil  delies  homes 
de  armaa : e posto  que  algiis  delles  por  sua  pobreza  as  m 
teuha  de  seu  cO  tudo  ha  outroa  que  sam  ricos  e tem  muytas  = 
entre  este  numero  de  fogos  tamhora  muytos  Gentios 
moradores,  e offissiais  Cauaris,  e Guzarates  que  se  sus- 
tenta  do  que  tira  e ganham  dos  Portuguezes;  como  do 
mantimento  que  leua  do  terreyro  de  Goa,  acavrettado,  e 
trazido  cO  as  Armadas  que  por  este  efiFeyto  se  fazem  = 
Teram  este  dous  mil  cazados  prctos  que  h^  em  Goa  tres  mil 
e quinhentas  para  quatro  mil  pessoas  em  suas  cazas  Inuteis 
e de  nenhum  prestimo  pera  nenhuraa  couza  do  seruiso 
dolRe^;  Antes  se  sustenta  assy  do  que  ganha  com  hos 
Portuguezes  como  do  mantimento  que  as  armadas  traze  de 
fora  ==  '' 

Os*  soldados  Portuguezes  e filhos  seus  que  h^  om  Goa  que 
se  embarcam  nas  armadas,  nam  se  podo  saber  nem  apontar 
numero  serto : porque  ora  sam  mais  o ora  mcnos  conforme 
vem  do  royno , de  maneyra  que  as  vezes  sam  mil  e as  vezes 
mais  e se  for  como  estes  atmos  de  seis^entos  e trinta  para 
qua  em  quo  faltara  dous  annos  areo  naos  do  royno ; o ouue 
as  mais  mortes  e mayores  do^nsas  que;  uuuqua  se  virani  na 
India : seram  tfinto  menos  quanto  o exprimentou  o Conde 
de  Linhares  que  para  recuperar  Ceylara  e Mombassa  era 
‘ tempo  de  tantas  callamidades  Ihe  foy  nesessario  para  tam  * 


288 


APFBVDIX. 


grandes  emprasas  vallerse  de  OanarTs  e Oaifres  a=  e qaando 
logj'  ohegam  do  royno  os  consomem  muyto  as  doensas  oomo 
tambem  a todo  o forastoyro  que  chega  a esta  ^idade  de  Goa 
que  on  morrera  on  ohegam  ao  ultimo  que  tal  he  ho  clima 
della  que  nam  perdoa  a uinguem ; e em  particullar  aos 
nfais  gqrdos  e de  maia  carnea  porque  em  Ihe  dando  a doensa 
em  quatro  ou  sinquo  dlas  os  acaba.  E posto  que  a oanti- 
dade  de  fogos  referidos  e mais  abitadores  quo  se  declara 
nesta  descripaa  da  (^idado  de  Goa  aeja  do  nuraero  que  se 
tem  visto  foy  ja  tanto  mayor  do  quo  oje  h6  que  se  mostra 
muytoa  bayrros  sous  dospouoadoa  cG  a mtiyor  parte  das 
cazas  cay  das  e aa  que  aynda  esta  em  pee  d^sabitadas ; de 
maneyra  que  tirado  as  rellegiGis  que  oje  estam  om  mayor 
aumonto  do  que  nuuqua  estiuera  iia  tem  a (Jidade  de  Goa  a 
tersa  parte  dos  moradores  que  ja  teue  =:  e os  que  oje  h4 
mais  pobres  do  que  nuuqua  fora  como  se  vera  pello  comersio 
, que  antigamento  tiuera ; e pello  quo  oje  tem  : — 

A Ilha  do  Goa  da  grandeza  quo  temos  referido  tem  em 
sy  muy  boas  agoas  e muytas  fazendas  de  palmares,  e 
varzeas  de  airos,  e outros  legumes  e fruytos  que  possuem  a 
mayor  parte  os  Canaris  naturays  ja  todos  feytos  Christaos 
sen  do  tambem  muytas  fazendas  de  Portuguezes  = hauera 
aynda  por  toda  a tlha  de  Goa  quatro  mil  Gentios  morg,dores 
.F.  2M.  nella  pouco  mais  ou  menos  fora  os  da  ^idade  e sous  arrabaldes 
hos  mais  dos  Canan's  Christaos  quo  viuem  pella  entre  os 
quais  ha  muyfos  que  chama  gancares,  que  sam  como-offis- 
siais  da  Camara,  sam  gente  de  armas,  e couforme  a iigta  que 
deu  0 Tanadar  Mor  quo  he  capitara  desta  gente  sam  tres 
mil  e isesenta  e dous,  has  armas  do  que  vzam  sam  espin- 
gardas,  espadas,  e rodellas,  lansas,  e arcos  e frechas:  e 
todoe  estes  Canaris  da  Ilha  de  Goa?f  estam  debayxo  da  jur- 
dissS  do  Tanadar  MOr  = Sam  estes  Canaris  naturais  do 
Goa  muyto  dados  a papois  e demandas;  |K>rqne  alem  de 
terem*^^  grande  natural  pera  esoreuerem,  hos  que  fite  daw  a 
’•  isso  fazem  muyto  exsellente  letrti  por  onde  mais  de  mil 


APPENDIX. 


289 


escroiientes  na  (Jidade  de  Goa  e por  toda  a llha : posto  quo 
hos  mais  delles  'no  quo  oscreuem  aynda  quo  se-lhe-Mem 
copias  poem  mil  negradas,  sendo  quo  ha  outros  quo  escreuem 
muyto  serto  — Sam  tantas  as  demandas  que  trazem  hus 
cO  ontros  ajudando  tambem  has  quo  hos  Vortuguezos  exer- 
sita : as  quais  cO  seua  modes  de  requerimentos  e trapab.jUs 
estendem  por  muyto  largos  tempos : o paresse  a (^hdade  de 
Goa  mais  academia  de  letigantes,  que  escolla  de  armas,  nern 
fortalleza,  e (jJidade  fronteyra  e cabcssa  de  hum  tarn  della- 
tado  estado  = E podesse  aGrmar  que  ha  ojo  em  Goa  mais 
escriud.is  : soltessitadores  : aduogados:  o domandistas  : que 
soldadoa  e capi^tftis  que  cursem  as  armas  e o seruisso  dellas= 
E em  concluzfi;  sam  mais  de  sois  mil  as  demandas  quo  de 
prezente  audam  correndo  em  Goa : o so  no  Juizo  dos  feyt(is 
auia  em  Mayo  doste  anno  do  seis(^euto3  trinta  e sinquo  con- 
cluzos  de  muytos  annos  a esta  parte  mil  e quiuhentos  foytos 
a que  so  nam  podia  dar  vaztl  alem  dos  quo  andaujX  correndo 
e por  aquy  se  vira  os  que  aueria  nos  mais  juizos  — 

Os  Mosteyros  que  ha  nesta  llha  do  Goa  ^ o primeyro 
chamado  a Madre  de  D[eo]s  quo  esta  ja  fora  dos  arrabaldos 
da  (^idade  da  ban  da  do  Leste  junto  ao  passo  de  Daugim  do 
Capuchos  Recoletos  tern  de  ordinario  do  trinta  e sinquo 
pera  quarcta  relligiosos  nsm  tern  ordiuaria  alguiiia  da 
fazenda  real  porqne  se  susteuta  de  esmollas  e nem  por  isso 
passam  pior  que  hos  outros : Tern  estes  trades  quinzo 
negibs  que  hos  serue  : e muytos  dcstes  traded  fora  soldados 
como  tambem  o fora  grande  parte  dos  das  outras  relli- 
giOis  = e quando  va  nas  armadas  por  capellais  (Ai  passagey- 
ros  susede  muytas  vezes  nas  ocaziOis  do  brigas  pcllejarom 
cO  tanto  vallor  os  trades  como  os  soldados,  ou  03  merios 
exortarc-nos  a isso  com  crussefixos  nas  maos  ™ Esta  outro 
conueto  fora  da  Qidade  quo  chartia  "Nossa  S[enh]ora  de 
Pillar,  tambem  dos  mesraos  Recolletos  Capuchos  obra  do 
nij[e5a,  le^oa  da  (^idade  onde  do  ordinario  asistem  athe  des 
relligiosos  = sustenta-se  de  esmollus  como  os  outros  sem 

Y 


voi,.  iir. 


290 


APPENDIX. 


padesserera  faltas  de  tudo  ho  quo  Ihes  he  nessessario  = == 
Eat^  mais  nesta  Ilha  de  Goa  o Most[ei]rb  de  Noasa  S[e- 
nh]ora  do  Cabo  da  raesma  ordem  dos  Capuohoa  Recolletos 
onde  asistem  de  ordinario  athe  qninze  relligiosos  que  tam- 
bem  se  sustonta  de  csniollas  a caza  esta  na  paragem  que  se 
t^i’eferido  da  qual  athe  Goa  auera  duas  legoas  por  terra  : = 
Na' mesma  Ilha  do  Go»  era  huma  Igreja  chamada  Sancta 
, MW.  Barbara  que  ho  fvegezia  obra  de  mea  legoa  da  (jvidade  esta 
hum  Conuento  do  r[adr]es  do  Sam  Domingos  ondo  asiatera 
de  ordinario,  oyto,  athe  des/, relligiosos  a que  ellos  chama  a 
sua  Eecolletd  tern  do  ordinario  par  anno  seto  maos  e mea 
de  azeyto  para  alumiar  a lampada  do  sanptissimo  Sacra- 
mento = Naa  terras  de  Bardes  esta  o Conuento  ou  Collo- 
gio  dos  Reis  Magos  quo  he  da  ordem  do  Sam  Fran[cis]co 
onde  asistem  athe  sote  relligiosos  da  dita  ordem  = Neste 
conuento  ha  tantbern  hum  Collegio  de  meninos  pretos  e 
^ branquos,  ondolhes  ciisina  Latira  o ler  e escreuor  aos  que  ho 
nam  sabem : Nesto  Conuento  so  apozonta  hos  Vizorroia 
quando  deseihbarca  das  naos  em  quanto  se  prepara  ho  que 
he  nesesario  para  eutrarom  era  Goa  e tambem  va  a olle 
outras  muytas  vezes  ~ Tern  esto  conuento  do  ordinaria 
por  anno  ho  que  no  titollo  das  Igrejas  de  Bardes  fica  dccla' 
rado: — 

RIBEYRA  DOS  NAUIOS,  GABLES,  E 
MAIS  EMBARC.VSOIS  DE  SUA  MAO^?«. 

Tom  esta  ^idade  de  Goa  huma  ribeyra  de  Sua  a 

quo  chanift  Qj Ribeyra  Grande  vmdo  mora  o Veedor  da  fazenda 
0 estam  os  nauios  do  reroo  quo  serue  nas  armadas,  artilharia 
e fundissSL  della,  forraria,  e dous  Almazcis  de  prouimentos 
de  toda  sorte  que  sam  nesse&sarios  para  as  armadas  — Os 
nauios  que  Sua  Mag4^  oje  tenJ  em  Goa  serS»  athe  oytenta, 
entre  nauios  sanguiseis,  e galleotas  = Os^anguiseis  car- 
regam  sinquoerita  athe  sesenta  candis'^  que  cada  oandil  he 
como  vinto  alq[uey]res  de  Po#tugal  = Os  nauios  athe 


APPSKDIX. 


291 


oytSta  nouenta^candis,  e as  galleotaa  atbe  (jonto  e sin- 
quoenta  = os  miiiB  destes  nauios  e sangniseis  se  fazem  em 
Bassaym  por  contrato  que  se  fas  cO  bos  capitals  pella  muyta 
mad[0y]ra,  offissiais  e mais  petrecbos  quo  pera  iaso  aly  b^  ‘* 
e de  presente  porquo  bo  presso  da  mad[cy]ra  tern  creaido 
como  em  todas  as  raais  couzas ; so  fas  oada  sanguisel  por 
quatro  Qontos  e sinquoenta  patacOis : e cada  naaio  por  -seis 
90nto8  e sinquoenta : mas  ne  cO  isso  o capita  de  Bassaym 
que  ho  contratou  se  ouuo  por  pago  antes  moue  demanda  a 
Sua  Mag^.®  por  ficar  uotauelmente  lezo  — E posto  que  estes 
nauios  durem  sinquo  o seis  annos  a todo  mais : cO  tudo  vam  • 
para  Masoate,  Mallaqua,  Sam  Thome  e outras  partes  — 
Aondo  ordinariamento  fica  quazi  todos:  e alem  disto  os 
sucesos  da  gerra  em  que  de  contino  andft  sam  muy  varios  o 
gasta-noa  muyto  e assy  bo  nessesario  refazere>so  muytas 
vezes  as  armadas  do  nauios  nouos  e as  quo  escapa  dura 
algua  annos  e custa  o concertar  porque  em  quazi  todos  os 
portos  em  que  entrft  tern  nesaesidado  de  conserto  — Tern 
mais  Sua  buma  guallo  real  muyto  grande  o fermoza  , 
a que  cbarafl.  Sam  Miguel  e outra  mais  piquena  que  arribou 
indo  para  Mallaqua—  E uo  porto  do  Panollim  oyto  galleOis 
dos  quais  se  aparelbara  quatro  pera  sayrem  cO  dons  quo  oste 
annq  yiei'a  do  reyno  e fleam  no  estado : e dous  que  estam 
priusipiados,no  cais  do  Sancta  Cri[stiu]a  quo  vcm  aser  doze 
por  todos  e isto  a fora  a armada  de  Mascate,  Dio,  e Mallaqua, 
quo’  sam  do  numero  de  nauios  que  em  a discripsa  de  cada 
bua  ^as  ditas  fortallezas  se  aponta--  Mais  seis  nauios  de 
remo  que  bao  de  yr  cO  bos  galleOis  cu  seu  Capitum  Mor  o 
capitais  debayxo  das  ordeus  do  capitam  geral  dos  ditos 
galleOia. 

A artilbaria  que  hoj^estado  tern  em  Goa  de  prezonto  sam  f 
somente  9ento  e sinquoenfa  pessa»  nos  galleCis  = seto 
pessas  no  fo^Je  da  Agoada  =-=  quatro  pessas  no  forte  de 
Inessa  *S[eub] ora  do  Cabo.  Tres  pessas  no  forte  Sam 
Bras  do  passo  seoo  — Binquo  pessas  no  forte  e passo  do 


292 


APPENDIX, 


Sanctiago  = No  forte  de  MorMugft  seis  pessas  de  bronze==: 
desaSeis  sagres  para  ho  forte  de  Gaspar  Dia&  e Bardes=  No 
paso  de  Naroa  quatro  falcOis  e hura  berso  ==  huma  pesa  de 
ferro  de  quatro  liuras  siuqno  possas  na  galle  real  ==  Tres 
pessas  na  outra  galle  mais  piquena  = Noue  pessas  nouas 
na'jilibeyra  auern  mais  atlie  sasenta  sagres  que  anda  nos 
nauios  cfas  Sl’inadas  --==  Vdnte  falcuis  meios  falcOis  e bersos  = 
quinze  falcOis  moios  falcO)is  e bersos  no  almazc  que  sam  por 
todas  trezentas  e quatro  e a grande  falta  do  cobre  que  hd 
no  estado  da  India  he  caui^a  de  nil  auer  muyta  conforrae 
traballia  nis&o  o Condo  do  Linhares  VizoRoy  mas  vay  ho 
buscando  por  todos  os  modos,  e cO  ho  fauor  D[eo]s  fun- 
dira  muyta  em  sen  tempo  sc  estiuer  mais  annos  na  India  = 
A Barra  desta  (Jidado  de  Goa  ho  depois  de  enti’ar  da  ponta 
de  Nossa  S[cnb]ora  do  Cabo  o da  fortalleza  da  Agoada  pera 
dentro  distansia  do  nica  legoa  polio  Rio  asima  do  fronte  do 
^forte  de  Guaspar  Dias : onde  esta  hum  banco  de  area  quo  a 
atrauessa  com  hum  canal  do  des  brassas  de  largura  = e 
sinquo  brassas"  o mais  do  proamar  de  agoas  viuas  = 0 Rio 
no  prinsipio  cntro  as  ditas  pontas  tern  do  largura  huma  legoa: 
c entrando  para  dentro  vay  fazendo  hua  enseada  peradetras 
de  Nossa  S[onh]ora  do  Cabo  com  quo  fica  a largura  do  Rio 
mayor  e depois  vay  estreytando  pora  dentro  da  forn^a,que 
na  plant«a  se  veo  Antes  de  chogar  oste  Rio^ao  banco  e 
barra  Itinsa  hum  braso  pera  a bauda  do  Norte  a quo  cham3 
Nelur  = 0 qua!  vay  distansia  de  huma  legoa  pollas  torra&  de 
Bardes  dentro  e na  toma  a fazer  sayda  neste  Rio  se  ua  ijieter 
muytos  imui«»s  dos  que  hfi.  em  Goa  do  trato  =3  Passando  de 
Pangim*  fas  este  Rio  dous  brasses  hum  para  o Sul  e outro 
para  o Norte : o do  Sul  vay  athe  Sancta  Crus  e nam  passa 
mais  adiaiite  nem  tern  sayda  para  outr<i  parte,  0 outro  brasso 
que  lansa  para  a ban(!a  do  Norte  vay  fazendo  as  Ilhaa  de 
Choram,  Dinar,  c Jua:  e nem  por  isso  deyxa  lio  Rio  de  Goa 
de  tor  Tundo  bastiito  para  estare  nolle  surtos  e yrem  i 
a the  as  naos  do  jcyno  que  sam  ns  may  ores  embarcasOis  que 


, APPENDIX. 


293 


nauegfl  o tnar  =s  »=  A barra  de  Goa  a Velba  tern  tarnbcm 
hum  banco  de  arfea  que  a atrauessil;  por  meo  do  coal  ^sta 
0 canal  do  gem  brasas  de  largura  e sinquo  de  fundo  de 
preamar:  e seis  de  agoas  viuas:  o canal  de  Goa  demanda  ao 
Veste^  e o desta  barra  ao  Sul:  por  ondo  se  enira  nella 
aynda  com  Sul  como  fizenl  muytaa  embarcasOis  c5  lio 
ynuenio  = e quando  as  naoa  ou  ^galleOis  so  rccolhom  a 
Mormuga  se  ficam  seruindo  desta  baiTa  de  Goa  a V elha  por 
Ihe  ficar  em  direytura  = 

A costa  desta  Ilha  de  Goa  cori’o  ao  mesrao  rumo  do  Norte 
a sul  quo  a do  Damft;  Bassaym;  e Clianl:  nam  prefoyta- 
mente  metendo,  mais  pera  susuoste  o nornordcste  e quanto 
mais  se  vay  pera  o Sul  mais  vay  a costa  metendo  pera  o 
suaueste  = Os  ventoa  que  cursam  nosta  costa  sa  bos  mea- 
mos  quo  temos  dito  atraa,  ha  nella  athc  o Cabo  do  Com- 
orim  = As  correntea  tambem  sain  quazi  as  mesmaa  quo 
temos  dito  da  costa  do  Norto  tirado  que  como  osta  Goa?, asefc. 
desuiada  de  Cambaya  o gem  legoas  nam  Iho  alcansa  ja  as 
correntea  furiozas  de  aims  mares  = = 

As  viagtds  quo  ao  fazem  de  Goa  sam  muytas  porquo  se 
iiauega  para  ho  royno  e para  todo  ho  cstado  com  toda  sorte 
de  ombarcasOis  — A prinsipal  viagcm  o do  mais  porto  que 
se  fas,  4^  Goa  he  pera  Portugal  cm  iiaos  do  ({uatro  ciibertas 
que  sam  as  mayores  em  que  se  uauega  no  mar  salgado  = 

Ondo  so  leu/t  e trazera  gr.ande  oopia  do  tc/da  sorte  de  fa- 
zendas = As  que  vam  do  Portugual  earn  as  inilhores  o de 
mais  ganho,  ouro,  e prata  j porque  alem  dos  sinquoenta  por 
gento  que  ae  ganha  de  Portugal  para  a India  so  ^anha  maia 
a cresensa  quo  as  pattaquas  vallem  mais  de  oyto  tangas,  que 
do  presente  vallem  nouo  tangas  e mea  — e aynda  maia  e 
assy  vay  tambc  o ouro  c.resscndo  ao  mcsmo  theor  =:=  Cauza 
por  que  fora  crossendo  as  fazendas  ^ tudo  ho  mais  que  neste 
estado  ae  com  pm  com  ouro  e prata.  a tan  to  quo  ja  raramente 
BO,  podo'ter  ganho  nellas  ; ao  quo  mX  lul  poder  sc  5u8car 
^ remedio  porquo  como  o ouro  o prsitta  he  fazenda  por 


294 


ArrENDTX. 


todo  esfce  cstado,  vay  cressondo  e abayxando  eonforme  a 
fultH  dello  ha  - Trasso  de  Porfcugual  ttiuyfco  coral,  ass  Jr 
em  ramos  : como  redondo  ==  panes  de  vestir  de  toda  sorte  de 
Ifl : 0 a inesma  kl  — o tambem  pano  de  linho  branquo, 
inuytas  osmeraldas,  robi's,  perolas,  e aljofres  grandes  = que 
peeto  quo  estas  tres  ultimos  espessioa  se  leuaram  da  India 
pera  Pbrtirgal ; com  tudo  cressera  depois  tanto  em  prosso 
na  India  quo  so  tornarft  a trazer  a ella  cfe  grandes  ynteresses ; 
e assy  tambe  outras  pedras  preciozaa  de  diferentes  sortea : 
assy  aoltas  como  feytas  en^  joyaa.  Todo  ho  gonero  e sorte 
de  couzas  do  corner  o beber  tirade  pam  e vat*a,  que  se  nam 
pode  trazer  por  voniaga:  e quaisquer  pessaa^ricas  e curiozaa 
que  lios  Reis  dcste  oriente  compra  folhas  de  espada  largas 
e estroytas  porijuo  as  ostreytas  seruc  pera  os  Portuguezes,  e 
tambem  as  largas  porem  estas  compra  mais  comumento  os 
naturals,  c particullarmente  os  Mouros,  e tambem  artilharia, 
^ e com  mais  commodidade  a de  forro  que  se  viora  muyto 
alem  do  muyto  quo  so  ynteressa  nella  se  ganhara  muyto 
mais  em  ficar*  todo  ho  estado  prouido  cO  ella  para  defensa  de 
suas  Cidades  fortallezas  o einbarcasOis  = e em  efieyto  athe 
pedras  de  atafona  so  trazom  de  Portugual  e com  grande 
ganho  sendo  hum  dos  milhores  lastros  que  podem  trazer  as 
naos  — Todas  estas  fazendas  que  vem  de  Portugual  nam 
pagarn  diroytos  nenhus  sondo  os  ganhos  dejjas  has  vezes 
exsosivas : e na  prata  e ouro  assy  em  pessaS,*  como  em 
moeda  sempre  passa  do  sinquoenta  por  qento : couza  pOrque 
as  naos  vem  a custar  tanto  ha  fazenda  real  e rondeV^m  tarn 
pouco  =*  = 

0 quo  leua  da  India  sam  muytaa  couzas  porem  nas  mais 
dollas  ha  oje  muyto  pouco  ynterosso;  pellos  Olandezes  e 
Ingrozes  encherem  toda  a Europa  roupas  : em  que  auia, 
e nas  drogas,  o prinftipad  ganfio  deste  coraersio  e aynda  ass  Jr 
leuain  pimenta  por  conta  delRey, — o alguma^roupas  de  0am- 
baya : caras  e roms ; porque  tabera  esllaB  sH  tarn  yftfeyiergs ; 

' e so  menos  do  que  autigamente  quo  aynda  que  na  estiuei'S/  tarn® 


APPENDIX. 


295 


eobidas  de  pposso,  e os  Ollandezos  o Ingrezoa  as  na  leuanl 
aynda  assy  em  grande  copia  fora  bos  ganhos  muy  piquenoQi  = f. 
Leua  se  tambem  algumas  roupas  de  Tatocorim  quo  uam  estil 
tam  vesiadas ; mas  tambem  nestas  ha  pouco  ganho  — pessas 
de  eruas  de  Bengalla  = porqao  as  cassas  ja  nfi  sam  Jo  nenlium 
ynteresse  ==  Leuanse  tambem  algus  enricollados  e Ballaohoa 
de  Negapata  o pimenta  de  Canara*  e costa  do  ivTallauar,  o 
canella  de  Ceylfto  = '"e  desta  se  nA,  partessipil  os  Olandezes 
e tambera  alguma  do  mato  = e no  tocante  has  mais  drogas, 
nos,  e massa,  ja  nam  yem  a nossos  mjlos,  e crauo  muy  pouco 
0 qoal  tambem  se  leua  pora  Portugual ; e todas  as  fazendas 
de  Chyna  corao^sedas  em  pessas  e em  rama:  porem  estam 
oje  om  ta.  alto  presso  que  na.  so  leua  ja  para  veniaga  pello 
pouco  ganho,  ou  nenlmm  quo  pode  auer  nellas  — Hia 
antigamente  muyto  anil  de  Cambaya:  Ja  ojo  pello  louarcm 
Ingrezea  e Olandezes  nem  na  India  esta  era  presso  pora  se 
poder  leuar,  nem  om  Portugual  torn  expodiente=  Alem 
destas  fazendas  se  leua  outras  do  pouco  moraento  como  hurna 
fruyta  que  chama  Coca,  o por  outro  nome  ivTatapeyxo  = 
Couraraa  = Cayxaria  dourados  do  Japa  o China  = Escri- 
torios  e contadores  de  Dio,  o do  todo  o Norte  colcliiis  laura- 
das  e camas  clo  Dio,  Cbaul,  Bengalla,  o China  = o Cnurim 
por  outro  nome  Buzio  = atlio  conseyras  pora  portas  so 
leuil  da  India  : muyto  pno  ])reto  do  Mosambiijuo  e muyto 
arros  que  atera  do  sor  iiiantimeTito  lie  veniaga  ein  rpra  so 
ganhu  mais  quo  om  muytas  das  outras  = o por  roraate  de 
tudo  se'  leua  e tern  leuado  ranytos  diauiantos  das  minas 
nouas  que  se  abrinl,  e ouue  nao  quo  leuana  duaa  arrobas  de 
diamantes:  porem  ojo  sam  ja  muyto  mcnos  e assy^  pcllas 
ditas  cauzas  esta  oste  comersio  do  Portugual  muy  aonbado  ; 
seudo  que  so  nauegaua  ,nello  mais  de  dous  milhOis  de  onro  ; 
e ojo  aponas  andarH  trezentos  mih  cruzados  : do  sorto  qne 
nora  os  offisiais  tem  quern  Ihe  carreguo,  nem  dies  com  que 
carregaPseus  gasalhados  = 0 tempo  cm  que  costumc^partir 

estas  naos  da  India  pova  ho  reyno  lie  desdo  o prinsipio  de 


296 


APPJfiNDrX. 


Dozembro  atho  meo  do  Mar<jo : porom  om  passaudo  dee,  ou 
doze  do  Feuoroyro  = se  nil  vain  athe  Mosambique  c6  a 
Mousfi,  doe  Leu  antes  com  quo  partom  as  cmbarcasOis  quo 
vam  para  esta  Ibrtalleza:  passam  cO  trabalho  o Cabo  do  Boa 
Esperausa:  e quando  chegam  a costa  do  Portugal  he  ja 
qo/v/.i  ynuerno  cm  quo  padessem  tarn  bom  ygoais  detrimentos 
assy  naos/Lomo  geute,  o fazendas  ==  = == 

As  viageis  depois  das  do  royno  quo*  se  fazem  de  Goa  do 
mais  considerassA,  sam  para  Mosambique  o sam  estanques 
quo  sc  dam  por  despaoho:  e sem  trabalho  rendem  ao  dono 
des,  0 doze  mil  conformc  as  embarcasors  quo  vam  de 
tres,  quatro,  athe  sinquo  Pataxos : leuam  roupas  como  fica 
dito:  0 todo  ho  gonoro  do  mautimontos  o quo  tiido  se 
declara  no  t](ollo  de  Mos!imbi(|uo  : Onde  so  pos  tftbom  ho 
tempo  cm  quo  vA  o vein : ho  muyto  quo  as  vezea  trazem 
estas  embarcasi'iis  quo  ordiuariamente  sam  pataxos  do  quin- 
hentos  athe  mil  Cand'is  = o aridara  neste  comersio  melhoria 
do  hum  milhft  = = = As  viageis  de  Goa  pera  Mombassa 
0 toda  aquollA  costa  sam  do  pouco  moraonto  quo  om  Goa  nA 
ha  as  roupaa  quo  iiolla  so  vallem.  E assy  ostas  se  fazem  do 
K.  2574.  Dio,  DamA,  e Chaul : e quando  de  Goa  vay  alguma  galleota, 
leua  prouimontos  o alguraas  teadas  e so  tras  sera,  oscrauos, 
marlim,  o ambro  = Vam,  o vorn  no  mosmo  tempo  quo  a 
Mosambiquo  = Andara  nesto  comersio  do  poa  dos  athe 
doze  mil 

Ah  viageis  quo  tambem  so  fazem  de  Goa  de  yinportansia 
sam  as  de  Mascato  o Basora,  porque  quern  vay  a Bassora, 
primeyro  hr.  do  yr  a Mascato,  o nora  sempro  as  erabarcasOis 
que  vam  a Mascato  passarn  a Bassora  senA  as  quo  quereyn 
pagar  diroytos  do  quo  leuam  em  Mascato : o que  selleua  ja 
atras  fica  dito  e os  tempos  em  que  nauegA  onde  andam 
pataxos  0 galleotas  oniamos  de  remo  = Tiarscha  omprogado 
nesto  comersio  quiuhentos  mil  X®.®  — o a^  vezos  mais,  e 
monos  = a mayor  copia  que  de  Mascato  vein  empreifedp  pera 
‘ Goa  h^  em  aljofar  de  Bahurem  em  que  bA  muyto  ganlio 


APPKSDIX. 


297 


porem  de’nenhum  so  paga  direytos  porque  como  he  couza 
de  pouco  volume  fasilinente  se  esconde  = NauegasSe  do 
Goa  pora  ho  Sindo  lenando  marfim : cocoa  — copra  ~ calaym 
quo  h6  hum  metal  da  cor  de  estanho  alguina  couza  maia 
duro,  e todas  as  drogas  de  pimenta:  crauo : cardamomo: 
canella : gengiuro : e nos:  o massa : Vay  se  cm  gallo6tas 
de  quatro  ^entos  atlio  quinhentos^eandis  no  mesrno  tempo 
orn  que  varn  para  ilascato  = e assy  tabem  ha  vinda  trazem 
roupas  do  toda  sorto  de  niais  dura  que  us  do  Cambaya  e 
athe  as  camizas  e ciroulas  fcytias  pello  pouco  quo  custa  hos 
feytios,  e esia  gcnte  do  Sinde  ser  particiilarmente  dada  a 
cozer  0 laurar  de  sorte  que  athe  couroa  vem  do  la  laurados 
muyto  curiozamente  de  seda  que  sam  de  railytu  dura  e 
estima  = andar3,  neste  comersio  emprogados  do  oytenta  athe 
Qera  mil  X?*  = o que  se  yntende  so  nas  embarcas(>is  que 
vam  e vem  pera  Goa  =:  = ==  As  viagcis  quo  se  fazem  de 
Goa  para  Cacha  e Nagana  nam  sam  ordinarias  de  todos  os. 
annoa  senam  quando  so  offerease ; vam  o vem  em  galleotas 
de  remo,  e pataxos,  no  mesmo  tempo  que  ao  Sinde  o Maacatto 
posto  que  em  galleotas  de  rerao  sam  muy  arriscadas,  polios 
muytos  paros  que  vam  aquella  onseada ; o os  Sanganea 
tambem  andarem  roubaudo  como  fica  dito  = o quo  se  leua, 
e trg,8^  fica  referido  ja  em  seu  lugar : e quando  ae  fazem  as 
viagcis  a sajuamento  dam  muyto  proucito  q ynteresse  = 
Andam  neste  comersio  de  vinto  athe  trinta  mil  X®®  = 

A nauegassft  que  se  fas  do  Goa  para  Dio  hil  he  em  rezam 
do  ccyriorsio  de  considerassSb  porque  em  Dio,  na  ha  mais  que 
ho  que  fica  dito  : senil  por  respeyto  do  prouer^  esta  fortal- 
leza  do  nessessario  : e assy  nft  so  vay  la  senft  com  a^armada 
que  leua  a Cafilla  pera  Cambaya  pera  onde  de  Goa  hia  todos 
08  verOis  duas  Cafillaa  pom  grande  copia  do  naiiios  de  remo 
que  as  nezes  cheganam  a trczentoj^ : porem  oje  pellas  rezOis 
apontadas  apesias  hi\  cO  que  poder  yt  huma  e os  nauios  de 
CaSlla  Aa  chegam  a'  quarpta  e esses  aynda  vem  de'scarre- 
gados:  nam  tendo  mais  ynlcresses  que  ho  que  leuft  de' 


298 


APPENDIX. 


frefces  e ayntla  em  copra,  cocos,  areca,  marfim,  e "callaym  e 
algu&as  drogas  posto  quo  poucas  = e assy  andando  anti- 
gaiuente  neste  comersio  erapregadoa  mais  do  dous  tnilhOis : 
na  chegam  a audar  oje  ^ento  e sinquoenta  mil  X?* : donde 
se  deyxa  bem  vir  a graude  perda  e descayda  quo  so  nesta 
f.268.  terrti'-dera  as  Olandezos  e Yngrezcs  a esto  estado== 

Para  a bauda  do  siil  se  fazem  de  Goa  muytas  viageis  e 
nauegasrds  as  primeyras  sam  para  o Canara  com  armada  quo 
leua  e tras  quatro  Caflllas  liuma  mais  ou  menos  todos  os 
verOia  de  arros  e trazor  pimcnta  para  as  iiaos  om  quo  an  da 
ora  v^eiito,  ora  ^ento  e sinquoenta  nauios  entro  grandes  e 
piquenas  quo  cliama  paranguos,  e trazem  tabe  do  Onor  o 
Cananor  a madeyra  de  mastros  e vorgas,  nessossarios  pera 
a ribcyra  de  Sua  Mag*!®  Anda  nesto  coTnersio  do  arros  a 
fora  a pimonta  mais  do  trezontos  mil  X®*  = = == 

A armada  do  Cabo  de  Comorim  leua  o tras  a Cafilla  do 
, Cochi m duas  vczes  cada  vera  = A primoyra  com  a Cafilla 
que  vay  buscar  a pimenta  pera  as  naos  do  royno  e a cay- 
xaria  courama  e mais  fazendas  do  roupas  do  Sam  Thome, 
Ncgapatam  e Tutocorim  cm  que  andaua  do  trinta  pera  cor- 
renta  nauios  de  Remo  o oje  a penas  chegam  a doze  = An- 
dara  neste  cornersio  empregados  a fora  a pimenta  sosonta 
atho  oylenta  mil  A segunda  vez  que  v:ay  a 

armada  a Cochim  chega  athe  o Cabo  de  Comorim  oade‘anti- 
gamonte  hia  esperar  ns  embarcasOis  da  China,  Mallaqua,  e 
Bengalla,  que  ja  agora  sam  quazi  nonliuas  mais  que  nlgumas 
de  Mallaqua : de  Bengalla  muy  poucas,  o menos  da  Cliinn  = 
Tras  esta  afmada  as  ernbarciisOis  da  Costa  do  Travancor, 
Coulairr,  e Cochim  afora  os  n\oradorcs  do  Tutocorim  e m 
fazendas  quo  aly  vam  ]iarar  de  Bengalla,  Mallaqua,  China, 
0 Manilla ; Era  esta  Cafilla  antigamente  de  sinquoenta  o 
mais  nauios : hoje  nii  ’chega  a des  = Andara  neste  coiper- 
sio  de  quarenta  para  sinquoenta  mil  X^  o qaando  as  vezes 
vcm  embarcasrtis  do  sul  hum  nauio  tras  esta  contia  f5  p 
tempo  em  quo  cusiuma  yr  ho  em  Fcuoreyro ; o uir  por  todo 


APPENDIX. 


Mayo : o iambo^  costuma  trazer  a Goa  arros  das  fortallezas 
do  Canara  = = ^ 

A nauegassa  quo  so  fas  de  Goa  para  Coyla  he  era  pataxos 
ou  galleotas  de  remo:  Vara  por  todo  Sotembro  quatro,  ou 
sinquo  pataxos ; ou  des  ou  dozo  galleotas  pera  trazerein  a 
canella  quo  ojo  corre  so  por  conta  de  “^Sua  Mag^^f  e assy 
nenhum  vassalo  ynteressa  noste#  coraersio  ra'his  quo  hos 
fretes  porque  Ihe  fretam  as  ditas  etnbarcasOis  as  quais 
tambem  leuSl  algua  prouymeutos  pera  a dita  Ilha  de  gonte 
e 0 mais  que  lh(3  he  ueasessariq  pera  susteuto  de  seus  niora- 
doroa=  A-cautidade  de  canella  quo  trazem  sam  dous  mil 
athe  tros  mil  bares  que  cada  bar  sam  era  Goa  tros  quin- 
tais  e des  arratcis  =:=  Iraportou  esta  canella  a Sua  Mag‘^!’ 

0 anno  de  soi.s9entos  trinta  o tres  por  yndustria  do  Condo 
de  Linhares  cento  o siuquoenta  rail  X®"'  de  que  so  tirara  hos 
gastos;  Trazem  tambem  cstas  carauollas,  o pataxos,  os 
Ellefantes  de  Ceylil  pera  era  Goa  so  venderem  por  conta  de 
Sua  Magf®  ho  numoro  he  conforme  se  cassft  : que  ordiuaria- 
mento  he  de  sete  athe  des  = o presso  por  quo  so  vendem 
tambem  na  he  serto,  porque  he  conforrao  a grandeza,  e a 
boa  ocazift  = porque  ha  Ellefanto  por  quo  so  da  dous  e tros 
rail  pagodes,  do  noue  c^ontos  rts  o pagodo  ~ E outi'oa 
tabem  vallem  menos.  lie  auiraal  que  custa  niuyto  a em- 
barcar  e trazer  por  sua  grandeza ; o taobcm  morrem 
muytos — i’mzem  as  ditas  ombarcasOis  muytos  cocos  por  f. 
lastto  e as  curiozidades  do  Ceyla  do  cal/ides  do  lansas, 
alabarUas,  yinageis  do  inarfim,  pessas  do  cristal,  osteyras  e 
chapeos  de  pallia  que  sam  de  muyta  estiina  — > 

A nauegassfl  que  autigaraonto  se  lazia  de  Goa*  pera  a 
China  era  tirade  a do  reyno  a mais  rica;  e do  mayorea 
cabodais  que  nuia  neste  estado  — porque  so  a primeyra  nao 
quo  chamauiX  a da  prata  (|ue  loinarH  os  Olandezes  aos  Portu- 
guezes  na  lin^ia  ^ a primeyra  promessa  quo  se  Ihe  fes  de 
pajti.do  qiorque  alar||as8era,  forSt  mil  pfi-is  de  ouro  qhe  cada 
pk  tom  tres  quartas  de  arratal  e oje  ha  anno  em  que* 


268ft. 


300 


APPKMDIX, 


apenaa  bdL  qneiii  qiieyra  carregar  huma  gal^ota  d«  trezeuto 
pera\]uatro  centos  caudis  pella  continua  asistenoia  oO  que 
08  Olandezes  cstam  esperando  no  estrojto  de  Sincapum 
estas  embai  cassis  que  vam  de  Goa  para  a China  ou  pera 
Manilla  e de  la  passtl  ha  China  = 0 que  leuft  para  Manilla 

sam  v.inhos  = azeifea  = eacrauos  --==  amendoaa  — farinhas  — 
pimenta  ==  dordoalha  ==  poupas  de  cachas,  e algumas  beati- 
Ihns,  0 canequis  ~ e o mais  quo  se  leuaua  nos  primeyros 
tempos  eril  inuytaa  joyas  de  diamantes  de  que  a fazenda 
real  nam  tinha  nenhus  direytos  ymportando  grandes  contias: 
Mas  foram  taiitos  que  ja  oje  la  tem  menoa  vallia  que  era 
Goa  =--  e assy  naa  embarcasOis  que  vam  e vem  a China  e 
Manilla  andarnm  do  duzentoa  e sinquoeuta  para  trezentoa 
mil  prosupondo  como  atras  fica  dito  que  estas  embar- 
casOis  sain  csperadas  nas  monsOis  da  vinda  no  estreyto  de 
Sinquapura : de  quatro  sinquo  e seis,  entre  naos  e pataxos 
Olandezes  muy  bem  artilhados  e so  cO  ho  lustro  pera  iicarem 
raais  ligeyros  — Onde  tomando  as  nossas  ompaohadas  a 
carregadas  seni  artilharia ; ou  muy  pouco  para  se  defenderem 
sam  tomadas  o veudo  o pouco  meo  que  ha  para  Iho  escupa- 
rem  os  que  vem  uellas  dam  cO  as  galleotas/ou  pataxos  a 
costa  0 ds  vezes  os  queymd : saluando  o ouro  quo  he  su- 
stansia  de  tudo ; e alguma  pedraria  do  rubi's  e aljofrps^  e 
alrniscar  : por^cuja  cauza,  o mayor  ou  quazi  todp  o ornprezo 
he  nestas  duas  couzas  ,*  seudo  o lastro  e mais  carga  de 
niuyta  inenos  ymportansia  ; Mas  como  as  fazendas  da  China 
sam  todas  do  muyta  valiia:  nunqua  deyxam  de  Iser  do 
muyta  consklerassd  quaisquer  que  hos  enemigos  tomi : 
porque  nunqna  podem  deyxar  de  ser  rneuos  — Tutu- 
naga  que  he  hum  metal  mais  preto  que  estanho : e Calatra 
muyto  mais  duro  ; lancoas  que  he  po^  outro  nome  galang^ 
= lousa  de  toda  sortw  e^a  milhor  que  ha  no  mundo  i pito 
da  China  — asucares  bons  e muytos  branqpos  — era  fim 
muyta  Seda  assy  em  pessas  como  em  rima:  muytoaf  dqiwi- 
dos ; que  qualquor  destas  couzas  sam  do  gimide  presso  e a 


APPJCNDIX. 


301 


falta  dellag  as  fas  aynda  sobir  mais—  0 quo  vein  do 
Manilla  sam  asaoares  qua  a mesma  terra  dd  tarn  bOs  cjpmo 
os  da  China  = sapa  quo  he  hum  pao  quo  tambem  aly  nasso 
que  seme  de  tintas  = cmuo  — tartaruga  = e algum  ouro 
tambem  da  terra  = Os  tempos  em  que  vara  estas  em- 
barcasOia  para  Manilla  e China  he  deadi?  Mar^o  athe  todo 
Mayo : e quando  vein  na  monta  do  sedo  he  euvDeuSmbro : 
chegando  a Goa  em  Jauoyro  = e na  do  tarde  eni  Feuereyro; 
e chegam  a Goa  em  MaVyo,  Abril,  athe  Mayo  ~ p. 

A nauegassam  do  Coa  para  Mallaqua  so  fus  no  mcsmo 
tempo  que  paj’a  a China  o Manilla  e alem  disso  tambem  em 
Setembro  = Esta  eato  comersio  ja  quazi  do  todo  acabado : 
porque  como  era  Malaqua  uain  auia  mais  que  as  fazendas 
do  Sul  de  que  as  prinsipais  era  drogas  de  pimcnta,  crauo, 
nos,  massa  = e todas  as  iinha  os  Oiaudezes  e Ingrezos  se- 
nhoreadoj  e os  Jaos  o Mallayos  nara  vinha  buscar  a Mal- 
laqua as  roupas  de  que  so  vestem  pellas  terera  polios  Olan- 
dezes.  Esta  esta  fortalleza  oje  tam  falta  de  comersio,  e 
trato:  que  sendo  huma  das  tres  da  India/ nara  ouue  era 
' Setembro  de  seisQento  trinta  e tres  prouido  quo  quizosse 
,yr  entrar  Bella  por  onde  so  mandou  capitam  por  Sua  Mag^? 
mas  aynda  vam  huma;  e duas  embarcasOis  de  quinhentos 
para  seis9eutds  candis : e trara  nestc  trato  om  Callaym,  quo 
he  s6  0 que  ^'e  hi  em  Mallaqua,  e algum  crauo,  e tartaruga, 
que  Ihe  void  do  Macassa  sinquoenta  mil  i^mpregadoa  a 
fora^algumas  miudezas  que  nain  sam  do  moinonto. 

Vein  a Goa  alem  das  partes  referidas  huma  nao  mourisca 
todoB  os  annos  piquona  do  iioy  de  Carem  do^estreyto  de 
Meca  = que  esta  cm  pas  cO  ho  estado  quo  tras  ensenso,  e 
azeuro ; e algus  chainallottos  =====  Uas  llhas  de  Mal- 
diua  e de  Mamale  vam  tambem  muytas  gundras  que  sa 
hus  nauios  do  remo  piquenes  e yialjpytos  pellos  quais  so 
dia  que  a palmeyra  poem  hum  nauio  ha  vella : porquo  ho 
ha  do  mesmo^pao  da  palmeyra,  cozido  cO  ho  cayiv 
dSa  seus  cocos:  a carga'dolias  ho  ho  mesmo  cuyro  dos* 


cocos  Ho  mantimento  da  gente  dosts.^  embnrcasOis  os 
meacnos  cocos,  e a agoa  delles  mesmoa  os  mastros,  e as 
virgaa  das  palmeyraa  = as  vellas  do  esteyms  de  palma  = 
As  de  Manialle  nam  trazom  rnais  que  cayro,  e destas  vein 
inaia  todo  pera  a ribeyra  do  Goa—  As  de  Maldiua  vem 
iwinente  a Goa;  o timem  cayro  = ou  buzio  e destas  Ilhas 
he  todo  ho  "jue  ha  iiest(^  estudo  = poyxo  sequo  que  chauifi. 
coraballamas ; algum  ambar,  tartaruga  = o coco  que  chama 
de  Maldiua  ou  das  Ilbas  que  so  tern  por  grande  contrapes- 
sonha  niuytas  esteyra^  e cocos  ordiuarios  que  inda  quo 
piquenos  se  tern  por  do  milhor  came  que  hos  mais  da 
India  = 0 tempo  em  que  vam  e vem  he  desde  Setembro 
athe  Mayo:  em  quanto  dura  overtl=  Trara  o comersio 
da  nao  do  Rey  de  Cayxim  e destas  gundras  einpregadb  ao 
redor  de  triuta  mil  = 

Do  tudo  ho  referido  so  colligo  que  audit  nos  comersios  e 
uauegassbis  da  (^^idado  do  Goa  dous  miUiois ; oyto  Rentes  e 
siuquoenta  o dous  mil  pOrom  ha  se  de  considerar  que 
as  vezes  o meetno  cabedal  que  anda  em  hum  comersio,  anda 
tambem  em  outro,  ou  parte  delle,  como  nos  comersios  da 
costa  do  Goa  pera  Cnmbaya,  ou  pera  Cochim  = e tambem 
parte  destes  dous  railhOis  ho  de  gontios  que  bus  sam  vas- 
sallos  do  Sua  Mag^®  e outros  nam  : e que  muytos  embarca- 
sOis  de  todas  as  partes  fazem  naofragio : ou  sam  tomadas 
dos  enemigos  Ingrezes,  ou  Olandezes  que  cbm  graudes 
escoadras  do  riaos  ocupa  estes  mares : e na  menos  de  maitos 
paros : quo  tern  feyto  e fazem  muyto  dano  = e aasy  que 
contra  todo^  estes  empedimentos  o outros  muitoa  sendo 
nam  menos  os  castigos  do  (Jeo  de  tromentas  ; fomes ; 
pestes:  e outros  malles:  hil  de  andur  serapre  prouenindo 
remedies  quern  tern  ils  costas  apezado  gouerno  deste  estado. 

F.  2SW.  G Rey  da  terra  de^tro,  com^'quem  confina  estas  nossas  de 
Goa:  Jiardes:  o falsetto  se  chama  o Idalcam,  ou  IdalxA: 
capitam  antigo  quo  fey  do  Bey  do  Bisiiaga  o so  Ihe  teua^fcbu 
com  osta  parte  das  terras  quo  gouernaua:  de  Gentio  se  ns 


APPENDIX. 


303 


Mouro : como  soifizeram  desto  Oriente  = 0 seu  reyno  por 

costa  ho  dosde  o %io  do  Mar  athe  Merizeu  quo  satn  ses^nta 
e duas  legoas  de  costa  e pello  sertA  dentro  se  estendera 
nesto  distrito  a doze  legoas  =:  A mayor  parte  de  sens  vas- 
sallos  sam  Mouros  mas  ayiida  tern  algus  Gentios  = A 
gente  que  pode  por  em  campo  chegou  ajuntar  o annc  pas- 
sado  era  Vijapor  que  he  a sua  corte  sinquoenta  mil  homes 
de  cauallo  pera  se  defender  do  Mogor  quo  Ihe  pos  serco 
nella,  afora  hos  de  pee  de  que  nam  fazern  numero  como  ja 
fica  dito  ; porem  estes  canallos  sS-  hos  mais  delies  guadaras  : 
e outre  oyto  bu  des  se  achara  hum  bora  arabio  ou  partio, 
porque  os  da  terra  aynda  que  iiassa  dollcs  ja  ufto  sam  couza 
de  considefassam,  doude  tambem  so  pode  ver  ho  que  sera 
dos  homes.  As  armas  de  que  se  vzam  sam  todas  as  que 
se  vzam  era  Europa  o sobro  ellas  muytos  arcos  e frechaa 
hos  de  pee  = easay  tain  bora  vza.  do  artilharia  prinsipalmento 
em  defen sa  de  suas  fortallezas  = A forma  de  pas  que 
guards  cO  ho  estado  ho  ser  ho  Idalca  amigo  de  amigos 
e enemigo  de  enemigos : porem  nam  guarda'  elle  isto  tarn 
pontualmente : porque  tern  comersio  com  ho  Dachem  onde 
manda  naos  de  Dabul  ^idade  sua  que  esta  no  Norte,  nam 
^ se  Ihe  dando  ,do  nosso  feytor  Portugues  que  esta  na  dita 
(Jidade,  como  atras  fica  dito  ; e ha  Persia  nauios  hus  e outros 
sera  cartazes  < e em  outros  muytos  particullares  na  guardam 
08  capitSlis  e gouernadores  do  IdalcA-  os  capitallos  das  pazes 
fazendo  algumas  semrezOis  aos  vassallos  do  Sua  Mag"!® 
Christandade  nenhuma  tem  os  naturais  do  Idalcarn  = antes 
acolhendose  os  escrauos  dos  Portuguezes  do  ‘Goa,  ou  os 
raesmos  Portuguezes  para  sua  terras  os  deyxa  viuer  em 
que  ley  querem  ; e ordinariaraento  os  escrauos  renegam  o 
os  Portuguezes  viuera  pfiuy  fora  da  ley  quo  prolossft  = He 
costume  o capitallo  das  pazes’  quo  *enha  serapre  o Idalcam 
hum  embayxador  na  corto  da  Goa  como  ordinariamonte 
p^sto  quo  algumas ^vezes  falLa ; e a despeza  ^ue  faz 
• he  a custa  do  seu  Key,  so  as  cazas  Iho  da  ho  estado  =;  e nas 


304 


APPENDIX. 


fazendas  que  aprezenta  na  alfandega  so  l)io  quitam  mil  e 
quitflientos  X®?  por  contra  to. 

As  fazendas  que  nestas  terras  do  Idalcft  num  sam 
ontras  mais  que  algumas  roapas  que  chamd>  beatilhas; 
argaris ; pacliai  is ; teadas ; pedras  bazarea ; grando  copia 
de  il’amantes  do  minas  que  a quinze  antios  se  doscobrirft  de 
nouo  nas  terras  do  Rey  .de  Golconda  que  cliarna  Ooturnaxa 
que  confina  com  estaa  do  Idalcam  : e deade  o deacobrimeto 
das  ditas  minas  atho  o prozcute  se  tom  empregado  mais  de. 
des  milhdis  nos  ditos  diama^tes  com  nenbum,  ou  may  pouco 
ynteresae  da  fazenda  real  ~ a cuio  respeyto  o Conde  de 
Linharea  Vizonoy  tein  criado  o oillssio  de  Corretor  Mor  da 
pedraria  com  quo  so  tom  esperatisa  poder  a fazoAda  real  ter 
F.2eo.  maia  proueyto  da  inuyta  dost©  estadoj — Vem  mais  das 
terras  de  Idalcam  para  Goa  toda  a sorte  de  mantimentos 
cauza  porquc  hos  Mouros  tern  com  esto  estadu  algus  maos 
^termos  paressiiido-lho  quo  nos  tem  o sustonto  em  suas 
mftos  particullarmente  trigo,  e carnes,  e legumes  de  que 
coraera  os  cauallos ; e muyto  mais  que  tudo  isto  os  mari- 
nbeyros  dos  nauios  do  remo  = = 

As  fazendas  por  quo  se  rosgatam  todas  as  que  vem  das 
terras  do  Idalcam  que  Ihe  vem  desta  ^lidade  de  Goa  sam 
todas  as  drogas  do  sul,  o as  mais  das  que  vem  dg,  yeyno 
prinsipaimen|o  prata,  ouro,  coral  = e muytas  da  China  como 
seda^  ouro,  lousa,  pao : e o quo  com  mais  ynstahsia  procurft 
c leuani  os  vag^allos  do  Idalxa,  sam  os  cauallos  Arabio&4][ue 
se  trazem  de  Mascate : e algus  Caohis  do  Cache : pSsJ;®  qii® 
estes  nA  com  tanta  vontado  : e assy  nil  dam  tan  to  por  olles: 
oomo  'pellos  Ai*abios — Tem  esta  (^lidade  de  Goa  hutna 
caza  de  poluora  ao  lougo  du  liio  hum  pouco  afastado  do 
Amago  da  ^idade  a qual  tinha  prins^piada  o Conde  da  Vidi- 
guoyra  e a acabou  o Conde  da  Linhares  com  grande  trabalbo 
e asistensia  custando-lhe  muyto  de  sua  fazenda,  ho  huma 
das  nfelhores  obras  e mais  beni  trassada  quo  ha 
" porquo  tom  muytas  cazas  entre  as  quais  hn  tree  patios  pera  < 


APPKNDIX. 


305 


ficare  as  ohiasin^s  tarn  distantes  liuas  das  outras  que  auendo 
desastre  de  fogo  em  hua  nft  possa  empesser  h^s  mais  dontro 
noste  sircuyto  ha  hua  foate  de  agoa  niuy  boa  e moem  con- 
tinuamente  oyto  raoynhos  cO  mullas  = 

As  armadas  que  ho  Estado  da  India  lansa  sara  a pjj.hfeyra  r,  2606 
pera  a costa  do  Ganara  que  coitistn?  athe  quinze  fustas  entre 
uauios  e sanguiseis  a ^egunda  ho  pora  ho  Norte  de  athe 
vinte  nauios  = a outra  pora  o cabp  de  Comorim  de  hiima 
gallo  e des  nauios  = outra  armada  que  se  chama  dos  auen- 
tnreyros  que  consfca  do  athe  viuto  nauios  esta  nam  sirue 
mais  que  de  andar  buscando  paros  dos  Mallauares,  etc. 


EFISTOLA 

POTENTISSIMI,  AC  INUICTISPIMl  EmA- 

NUELis  Regis  Poetugallv.  & Algauhiobum. 

&c.  De  ViCTOEiis  habitis  in  India 
& Malacha.  Ad.  S.  in  Christo  Patrem  & 
D^n^m  nostrum  D*n'm  Leonem.  X.  . 

Pont.  Maximum. 

[Woodcut  pf  arms  of  Portugal  enslgned  ivitJi  a crown.] 

Anctissirao  in  Christo  Patri,  ac  bea 
jSissimo  Dno  Dho  nostro  E.  S.  ad- ; 

® ditissimus  fill  us  Emanuel  Dei  gra 
. " tia  Rex  Portugallim  & Algarbior^Tw 

citra  ultraqwe  mare  in  Affrica  Domiiius  gui 
nee  & conquiste  uanigationis  ac  cOmertii 
Ethiopia,  Arabic,  Pcrsim,  atqwo  Indite,  humil 
lima  beatorum  pedum  oscula.  Quantum 
Deo  Opt.  Max.’qaantmn  & tibi^gratulari  de- 
beamus  Beatissirae  Pator,  vel  ex  nuutio  qiiod 
ijostra  fndicar<Classis  proximo  aitiilit  satis 
‘ apparet.  Quod  cinm  to  Pout.  ^lax.  te  S: 

Ro.  Ecclosiie  & Christiano  Oibi  presiden- 

VOL.  III.  A 


306 


ArPBNBiX. 


to  tam  admiranda  in  Dei  laudom  ac  gloriil 
gesta  tam  ex  uoto  succeaserint  tua  corte  lana 
tua  gloria  censeri  debet,  lure  itaqi^a  uiaum  est 
que  in  India  Dei  suffragio  ad  ipsiua  oultum 
spectantia  i\oatria  armis  inodo  facta  sint  ad 
’tuam  Jganctitatem,  utpoto  totius  Chnstiane 
Reipublice  Caput  orthodoxe  religionia 
normam^  carptim  ac  summatirn,  no  stilum 
Epistolarum  excedanius  prescribere,  ut  pro 
rorum  dignitate  cunctU  pensari,  summoq?^« 
dco  accept  a referri  ualeant,  ac  indies  sui  sau 
ctissimi  nomiriis  gliscentcm  laude  xpTaniq?/^ 
dogmatis  propagationem  facile  speromus, 
Tgitur  pnccata  post  plures  dubii  Martis  ui 
ctorias  non  sine  labore  & s«anguine  pai'taa, 
India  relictis  In  ea  opportunia  prosidiis  Al 
plionsus  de  AlbiecUerqj/e  protlio  capitaneus 
noster  qt  iacturA,  qiuX  siiperioribus  annis  ufi 
fecerant,  iniuriaqKe  ulcisceretur  auroam  Clier 
sonesum,  Malachara  accolo  appellant  con- 
tendit,  ea  est  inter  sinmn  magnum  et  Gauge 
ticum  sita  Vrbs  mire  magnitudinis,  utqfto  ui 
giiitiquinque  tnilliiiin  & amplius  lariura  cen 
seatur^terra  ipsa  fecundissima,  ac  nobiliswrnn 
rum,  qua^  fcrt  India  inertium  fcracissima 
lebratissimum  ob  id  Emporium,  ubi  non  * 
modo  uaria  aromata  & omnigeni  odores, 
sed  Auri  quoqt^e.  Argent i,  Margaritarura  ac 
preciosorum  lapillorum  magna  copia  af- 
fluit : Ilanc  Rex  Maarus  gubernabat  ea- 
tenus  uires  suas  Maumotica  S^ta  proten- 
dente,  c«tera  Gentiles  tenent ; Hue  itaqiit? 
pum  instructa  Classe  applicuisse^  Alptfon- 
sns  Vrbem  oppugnare  destlnat : Quod  pro- 
sontiontes  Sarraceni  bollo,  se  multis  JVIu-^ 


APPENDIX. 


307 


frustra  : commisso  bis  proolio,  nostri 

omnia  ad  bollum  contra  catbolica  fidei  lio- 
stea  opportuna:  militum  exercitus  : armovnm 
ac  cOmeatus  prfiosidia  ultro  offerat : pra38er- 
tim  si  maro  rubrum  suo  coniunot»^n  domi- 
nio  ura  classis  traiiciat : ubi  cOrnodissinjp 
utriusqite  uires  iungi  possent.  Hand  exiguij 
adorande  & uet^  cruois  lignum  ad  nos  mit 
tit  uiros  uafros  & industrios*poscen8  quor?t>/i 
ingenio  & artificio  a Sulcani  territorio  & 
llegiono  Nilii  deflecti  aliqua  diucrti  posse 
ex\stiDiat : aHerant  tunc  apud  noatrii  prefe- 
ctiim  a Narsingue  Roge  legati,  Rego  Gonti 
U adeo  potentissimo,  ut  mille  & quingcntos 
bclligeroa  Blcpbantes  armatoru?>i  equitii  qua 
draginta  millia  praater  innumorii  poditu  nu 
merum  suo  arbitrio  in  aciem  paruo  negotio 
proferro  iantuqite  agri  poasidoro  perbyDeatur 
qtfantu  aemeatri  itinere  uix  emettiri  possit,  huic 
plures  Reges  ac  Satrapes  parent,  quorum  nO 
nulli  maritimis  oris  proxiini  nobis  sunt  tri 
butaril.  Apud  Alfonsum  & Cambayo  Re- 
gis logatus,  terra  marique  potontissimi,  atquo  in 
ter  Djauros  maximi.  Item  a Zabayo  (Jbe 
quondam  dno,  atqwe  a Rege  Grosnpa^  xiliiqne 
,cdmplure8  Regum  Satrapumquo  legati  a no 
stro  prefecto  fedus  pacemqwc  ultro  exorantes 
ao  sua  munera  singuli  affcrentes,  in  bac  otia 
qum  proximo  appulit  classo  ab  Armuzii  Re 
go  legatus  cum  multis  margaritarM?a  rerumqiio 
pretiosarura  dcrtiis,  in  aignura  uldelicot  fide 
litatis  & recognitionis  ad  nos  uenit : Hunc 
Jlcgem^Alfonaus  idem  urbo  oppulctissima 
Sc  pr^’cipuo  emporio  Armusio  ui  capto  quin 
decim  miyium  Sorapbinorum,  ea  est  aurea 
moneta  ducatij  equiualons,  nnniiura  qobia 


308 


APPENDIX. 


tribatarium  effecerat.  Inter  hod  suc|^6ssus 
Pater  Beatissime  Diuino  suffragante  numi- 
ne  per  aniuersam  Indiana  plarimi  Spiritus 
sancti  gratia  igneqtea  afOlati  depositis  getilitiis 
orroribus  ii^ies  ad  nosiram  religionena  cO 
^ ^rsi  Vferam  doi  fidem  aguoscant^  obque  Deo 
Opt.  Max.  sumraas  ^gratia)  sunt  merito  refe 
rcndse ; quod  tarn  procul  ei  nostro  orbe,  in 
tarn  remotis  regiooibus,  quo  ne  fama  quide 
sui  sonctissinii  uominis  penetranerat^  nostra 
nunc  sedula  opera,  suatu  ueram  fidem  cul- 
tumqite  celebrari^  publicari,  ao  propagari  di- 
gnatus  sit : unde  proculdubio  diuina  fauon 
te  dementia  sperandu  ost,  cum  nunc  Prefe- 
ctus  noster  ad  mare  rubru  ut  eius  ostio  oc- 
cupato  Sarraccnis  earwm  partiu  cOmertia  in- 
terdicat roUctis  in  India  oportunis  presidiis 
ingenti  elasse  properat  ut  ibi  coniunctia  sub 
Crucis  uexillo  presbyteri  loannis  nostrisqwe 
uiiibus  maximum  dei  obsequinm^  So  Man 
medce  socte  dotrimentum  & ignominia  so- 
quatur,  extremaqwe  Orientis  ora,  quo  &^sa- 
cras  Apostolon/m  uocos,  intonuisse  comper- 
tum  os^  occidentali  nostrje  propediem  iunn- 
gatur.  So  ,ad  ueri  dei  cultuin  ipsius  suffragan- 
te  numino  traducatur.  8.  Sedi  Apostolicae 
ao  tuQB  sanctitati  ut  optimo  pastori  Christia 
ni  gregis  more  debitum  obsequium  So  obe 
dientiam  oblatura.  Bene  ualeat  Beatitude 
taa,  qnam  pientissimus  Deus  din  ao  felicis- 
sime  conseruare  So  angere  ad  liotam  digno- 
tur.  Dati  in  Vrbe  nostra  Olisipone.  S:  id  us 
flunias  Anno  Dfii,  M.n.xin.  " 

. Bomm  improssnm  per  Jacobum 
Mazochicam.  Q.'Augnsti  * 

rr’, — ■ ■.•.■ja:a8a‘;iiaiiyj|p38. 


