The Malay Annals 
Author(s): C.C. Brown 

Source: Journal of the Malayan Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society , Vol. 25, No. 2/3 (159), 

Sejarah Melayu or 'Malay Annals’ (October 1952), pp. 5-276 

Published by: Malaysian Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society 

Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/41502950 

Accessed: 18-10-2015 20:02 UTC 


Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/ 
info/about/policies/terms .j sp 

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content 
in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. 
For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. 



H Malaysian Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Journal 
of the Malayan Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society. 


http://www.jstor.org 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 
















CONTENTS 


Volume 25, parts 2 & 3, dated October, 1952, 
first published February, 1953 

(No. 159) 


The Malay Annals 
translated from Raffles MS 18, by 
C. C. Brown. 


Preface . . . . .. .. .. .. page 6 

Inroduction . . . . . . . . . . .. 7 

Engish Translation . . .. .. . . .. 12 

Commentary . . . . . . .. . . . . 205 

Abbreviations & References used in the Commentary 262 

Appendix A . . . . . . 263 

Appendix B (not published, see footnote, p. 263) 

Maps .. .. .. .. .. .. 264 

Index .. . . .. .. .. .. .. 266 


The Malayan Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society dates from 1923. It 
is the direct successor, by change of title, of the Straits Branch, R.A.S., which 
was founded in 1878. Its objects are the increase and diffusion of knowledge 
concerning the territories of the Federation of Malaya, Singapore, Sarawak, 
North Borneo and Brunei. Membership is open to anyone interested in 
the Society’s activities. The annual subscription is at present $10 a year, 
and there is no entrance fee. Members receive free one copy of all journals 
published for the period for which their membership is valid. In addition 
they may buy* single copies of back numbers at reduced rates. The latter 
include Sir Richard Winstedfs edition of the Malay text of Raffles MS 18, 
his History of Malaya, L. A. Mills’s History cf British Malaya (1824-67), and 
histories of the majoritv of the individual states, in addition to other general 
works. Indexes to all the publications of the old Straits Branch of the 
Society (1878-1922) and to the first twenty volumes of the present series 
(1923-47) are available to members at $2 and $3.50 each. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 





Preface 

This book has taken toll of the kindness of many whose 
ungrudging assistance I gratefully acknowledge here, viz. 
Professors Brough and Tritton, Dr. C. Hooykaas and Mr. D. 
Cowan of this School: Messrs. J. E. Kempe and J. V. Mills,, 
formerly of the Malayan Civil Service: Haji ZainaDAbidin, 
formerly Lecturer in Malay at this School and Inche’ Muhammad 
Yunus Maris, a pupil of mine here: last, and patently not least, Sir 
Richard Winstedt, who has read through the commentary and the 
introduction, corrected errors and suggested improvements and 
genially endured during the past two years almost innumerable 
demands from me on his time and patience. It is he of course 
who should have written this book: my own production can 
only say to him quod spiio et placeo, si placeo, tuum est. 

C. C. BROWN, 

School of Oriental and African Studies , 
University of London 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



Introduction 

For this translation I have used the text 1 (Raffles M.S. 18, 
Library of Royal Asiatic Society, London) edited by Sir Richard 
Winstedt ( JMBRAS , 16, pt 3, 1938). Ne sutor supra crepidam: 
and what might be called the external side of the Se/arah Melayu 
has been exhaustively dealt with by Sir Richard Winstedt, whether 
in regard to the date, authorship and texts (see pp. 27-41 of this 
text), the subject matter (see his The Malays, pp. 150-1 and his 
Malay Literature, pp. 106-109) or the history of the period con¬ 
cerned (see ch. Ill of his History of Malaya). Dr. W. Linehan too 
has contributed ( JMBRAS , 20 pt 2, 1947) an important study 
on the Introduction. It would have been an impertinence for me 
to venture into this historians' field. 

But for the student of the Malay language there is need of 
an English translation, with textual notes, or what is generally 
agreed to be the finest literary work in Malay. For, superbly 
though it is written, this the earliest and unique text is by no 
means free from obscurities, sometimes but not always caused 
by the vagaries of its copyist: and the MS, though a model of 
Malay calligraphy, is often not legible with certainty (Sir Richard 
Winstedt's romanization has a few errors here and there but as 
a whole is wonderfully accurate). The reader is accordingly 
confronted with a fair number of difficulties which I have done 
my best to solve (not always, I fear, with success) after comparing 
the romanization throughout with the MS and with the Shella- 
bear text 2 . My translation follows the original closely, for the 
benefit of the student. It is not easy to find a suitable English 
style for the translation, for though in many descriptive passages 
there is an archaic flavour which modern English cannot reproduce, 
the conversations recorded are often so modern in phrasing that 
they can only be rendered in modern, colloquial English. 1 have 
concerned myself almost entirely with what the text actually 
says, leaving the historical side to the experts. For such few 
of my notes as have a historical bearing I am indebted to 
Sir Richard Winstedt or other scholars: I would cite Appendix B 
particularly as such a note. 

An outline of the contents of Raffles MS. 18 is given in 
pp. 18-26 of Winstedt's text, and in the translation I have given 
a synopsis of each chapter. Here I give some impressions or the 
work as a whole. 

The work is generally known as the Se/arah Melayu, but this 
description is not found either in this or the Shellabear text: 
and 'Malay Annals' is a popular mistranslation. For Se/arah 
means 'genealogical tree' and the royal command to the author 

1. Hereinafter referred to as 'this text’. Page references in this Introduction, 
and in the Commentary beginning on page 205 below, are to this text, 
as edited by Sir Richard Winstedt. 

2. Malay' Literature Series, 9: 1909 (Pt. I), 1930 (Pt. II). 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 




8 


The Malay Annals 

was (p. 42, 1.20) 'to write a story (setting out) the descent of 
Malay Rajas with their customary ceremonial'. And 'he wrote 
this story as he received it from his grandfather and his father, 
assembling in it the tales told by men of bygone days, for the 
greater pleasure of his lord the king (p. 42, 1.33). The work 
is in fact a collection of stories about rulers and their courts, not 
only about Malay Rajas (including the rulers of states in Sumatra) 
but also about rulers in S. India, China, Indo-China, Siam and 
Java. There are no less than twenty-eight Sultans mentioned in 
the Sejarah Melayu, to say nothing of Rajas and Maharajas who 
were not Sultans: and little attempt is made to connect one story 
historically with another, each chapter merely beginning "Here 
now is a story of.” 

As the author was writing 'for the greater pleasure' of a 
Sultan of Malacca, it is to be expected that his central theme 
would be, as it is, the Greatness of Malacca, its rulers and chiefs, 
and the Superiority of the 'men of Malacca' over all others. The 
stages in the advance of Malacca to prosperity and importance are 
successively recorded (pp. 88, 125, 159 and 181), the final des¬ 
cription being that d'Albuquerque 'seeing how great was Malacca 
was inflamed with desire to possess it' (p. 182, 1.10, see note on 
ingin melihat ). This rise to greatness postulated excellence in 
rulers, chiefs and people. The author pays tribute to the 'justice' 
of Sultan Muhammad (p. 88, 1.17), to the 'noble character, 
justice and humaneness' of Sultan Muzaffar (p. 92, 1.37) and to 
the 'justice, humaneness and good looks (!■)' of Sultan Mansur 
(p. 100, 1.35). He is however no chartered eulogist of royalty. 
Sultan Ala'u'd-din is merely credited with great physical strength 
(p. 137, 1.44) which he uses to good effect in police measures 
(p. 140, 1.13) and all that the writer has explicitly to say in 
praise of Sultan Mahmud to whom some 65 pages of the Se/arah 
Melavu are devoted, is that he was exceptionally well-built (p. 
150, 1.40)! 

It is of the chiefs, especially the Bendaharas, that the author 
has most to say. Beginning with Bendahara Tun Perpateh Per- 
muka Berjajar who when he was giving an audience would only 
rise from his seat for an heir-apparent to the throne (p. 62, 1.7) 
we come presently to Bendahara Sriwa Raja whose devotion to the 
throne was such that he took poison because he thought he had 
incurred the royal displeasure (p. 93): then to Bendahara Paduka 
Raja who was 'accounted as one of the three outstanding men of 
his time' (p. 96, 1.30): and then to Bendahara Sri Maharaja, 'the 
grandest of all the Bendaharas' (p. 1160, 1.45), whose fame abroad 
was such that 'the masters of ships from the regions above the 
wind prayed for a safe voyage to Malacca and Bendahara Sri 
Maharaja' (p. 160, 1.4); and whose greatness as a leader was rated 
so highly by the Portuguese commander that he reported to 
d'Albuquerque that 'Malacca would never be taken in the lifetime 
of Bendahara Sri Maharaja' (p. 182, 1.35). He was a great dandy 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & Ilf 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 




9 


translated by C. C. Brown 

{p. 160, 1.29) and enormously wealthy, thanks to 'invariable suc¬ 
cess in his business enterprises' (p. 184, 1.5). But he never 
'shewed' his beautiful daughter to Sultan Mahmud (p. 183), 1.36) 
and this distrust of his royal master cost him his life (p. 18o, 1.40). 

Loyalty to Malay rulers was traditional. After describing in 
detail (p. 57) a pact between rulers and ruled that was copied 
from Indian practice the writer gives example after example of 
Malaya subjects' faithfulness to this pact of loyalty: such are, 
among others, Bendahara Paduka Raja after the murder of his son 
(p. 125); Tun Bayajit, an injured husband (p. 154); and 
Bendahara Sri Maharaja (p. 187). 

It is in the Oriental tradition that the author admires espe¬ 
cially the cunning ( cherdek ) of the people of Malaya. Time 
-after time the 'men of Malacca' are too clever for the foreigner. 
In the stories about China (pp. 116-123) the Malacca envoys 
succeed by a trick in doing what no Chinese could do, viz. see 
the face of the Lord of Iieaven (p. 118, 1.6). In Java, when 
Sultan Mansur goes to Majapahit as suitor for the hand of the 
Batara's daughter (p. 104), so effectively do the 'men of Malacca' 
turn the tables on the Batara who had persistently tried to make 
them look foolish that he has to admit their superiority (p. 109, 
1.3). Every encounter between Siam and Malacca is a triumph 
for the quick wits of the Malays. Bendahara Paduka Raja's ruse 
scares the invading Siamese into retreat (p. 97); and when, later, 
Malay envoys sent to Siam to propose a truce are roped in by the 
Siamese for an attack on a neighbouring state and are inhospitably 
put in the 'toughest' sector, Tun Telanai invents an excellent 
reason for their transfer to another part of the line (p. 99). In 
India Hang Nadim is too clever for the Kalinga designers of 
fabrics (pp. 165-7): and in Pahang the unlucky Sultan 'Abdu'l- 
Jamal is so deeply humiliated by successive triumphs of Malacca 
ingenuity at his expense that he abdicates in chagrin (pp. 168- 
176). Even the foreign missionaries of Islam look foolish when 
they encounter Malays: in Pasai, Tun Makhdum Mua has to be 
put right in his theology by his own pupil (p. 128): the egregious 
Makhdum Sadar Jahan is badly scored off by the Sri Rama in his 
cups (p. 177) and by his pupil Tun Mai Ulat Bulb (p. 178), 
and we find him shewing more discretion than valour in the 
battle for Malacca (p. 191). 

The artistry which the writer shews in his gentle digs at the 
foreigner (g unting makan di-hu/ong) characterizes the whole work. 
He has his dull moments. The literary conventions of his time 
demanded that every army or fleet should be 'in numbers past 
counting' (even when the population of Malacca is stated to be 
90,000, p. 180, 1.31 or possibly 190,000 as on p. 187, 1.39, the 
city sends out a fleet against Legur described as tiada terbilang Jagi 
banyak-nya); every girl must be of peerless beauty (there is a 
glorious exception in the case of Tun Trang who is merely 
described as 'quite a pretty girl', p. 183, 1.44); and no little space 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



10 


The Malay Annals 

is devoted to the genealogies of persons whose historical importance 
is infinitesimal. But on the other side of the account are to be 
set passages which for sheer narrative power will stand compa¬ 
rison with any literature that I know. Such are the exquisite 
story of Wan Empok and Wan Malini (pp. 54-56); the vivid 
tale of the taking of Tun Teja (pp. 169-173); the description 
of the coming of the Portuguese to Malacca ('the white Bengalis' 
as the Malacca people called them) pp. 181-2; and the dramatic 
recital of the events leading up to the execution of Bendahara Sri 
Maharaja (pp. 182-7). Malays are more often gay than grave, 
but there is true pathos in the death of Sultan Maliku'l-Mansur 
and the unforgettable cry of his faithful minister from his grave 
Ka-mana pula baginda pergi? Baik-lah kita di-sini (p. 79); in the 
picture of the captive Maharaja Sura and his favourite elephant 
(p. 121); in the description of the eve of the fall of Malacca (p. 
191); and even in moody Sultan Mahmud's parting from his 
favourite daughter (p. 209) . 

It is perhaps in pure characterization that the writer excels — 
in his little sketches of personality such as the Sri Bija 'diraja's 
combination of sport with duty (p. 119), the fopperies of Tun 
'Abdul (p. 122), the ways of the Sriwa Raja (pp. 152-6), Hang 
Hussain Chengang’s defiance of wedding etiauette (p. 157), the 
passion of the womenfolk for Raja Zainal-'Abidin (p. 158), the 
letter to Pasai (p. 178), the 'portrait of a busy man' (p. 181, 
1.10), Bendahara Sri Maharaja's game with the children of his 
household (p. 184), Tun Bayazid's tribute to his father's 'sense of 
colour' (p. 189), the faithful Sang Sura (pp. 189-90) and Sultan 
Husain of Haru's impressions of his visit to Sultan Mahmud 
in exile (p. 210). 

These vignettes owe not a little of their brilliance to the 
language in which the author is writing. Of Malay it has been 
said 3 "As a tongue which is capable of expressing, with admirable 
terseness, the most minute shades of difference between every 
physical action, and between many states of feeling. .. .Malay 
has probably few rivals." The truth of this dictum is attested 
on almost every page of the Sejarah Melayu. For lucidity com¬ 
bined with extreme economy of language such passages as those 
describing an army on the march (p. 51, 11. 23-36), the shaving 
of a child's head with an adze (p. 63, 11. 17-24), the murder 
of Tun Besar (pp. 124-5), the eccentricities of the Sriwa Raja 
(p. 153, 11. 1-13) and the dandyism of Bendahara Sri Maharaja 
(p. 160, 11. 29-39) would be hard to beat. 

To particular idioms and graces of this model of Malay 
writing I have tried apis Matinae more modoque to do justice in 
the commentary. I conclude this introduction with a general 
impression. 

In the Sejarah Melayu there is not yet that uniformity in the 
use of the pronouns of the first and second persons which became 

3. Clifford & Swettenham, Malay Dictionary, 1894. 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 




11 


translated by C. C. Brown 

a literary convention in the next century. A Raja generally speaks 
of himself as kite, but often, even when speaking to major chiefs, 
he uses the familial aku (e.g. p. 149, p. 149), 132) and there are 
instances (e.g. p. 2i4, 1.4) in which he uses two different pro¬ 
nouns for “I” in the same sentence! What he will use for “you” 
is unpredictable: possibly the title of the person addressed or 
some such term as tuan-tuan sakalian, but equally possibly the 
familiar kamu. Subjects speaking to Rajas generally use patek 
from p. 57 onwards (see p. 57, 1.12): among themselves it may 
be hamba , beta or sahaya without any perceptible distinction, and 
one cannot even guess what equivalent of the second person will 
be employed. 

There is the same looseness in the use of pronouns in the 
Malay of the East Coast to-day (see my Kelantan 4 Malay, pp. 
5-6 an,d my Trengganu 5 Malay, p. 2): and this is one of several 
strong resemblances that I find between thq Malay of the Se/arah 
Melayu and that of Kelantan and Trengganu. The spelling in 
thq MS is so far from consistent (see, e.g., note on mengempong 
on p. 48, 1.38) that it would be rash to dogmatize from the 
forms of a few words. It is however noteworthy that here and 
there in the MS words do appear in a form more re¬ 
cognizable on the East than on the. West coast of Malaya 
to-day. Such are ngebala (p. 77> 1.2: see note), menjeput (p. 
79, 1.11), tetapan (p. 85, 1.24), tepayan and makok (p. 130, 
1.43), pedekar (p. 160, 1.10): see also note on pedikir on p. 105, 
1.27), kubau (p. 119, 1.35: see note), hu/ang (p. 126, 1.30: see 
note) and gamang (p. 113, 1.41: see note). It is true that most 
of them appear elsewhere in the text in normal Riau-Johor form, 
but the spellings noted above may well represent lapses by the 
writer or copyist into writing as he spoke. There are other 
pointers in the same direction. The words beiburu atau on p. 

50, 1.39 appear in the MS as y\j ‘y.j. which might stand for 

beibuat ratau, the latter word being well known on the East Coast 
as meaning 'ground' for any sport. On p. 108, 1.41 we find biar- 
nya bermain, which if written biar nya bermain would be good 
Kelantan or Trengganu Malay of the present day (see my Kelantan 
Malay, p. 6). The di-mana tuan hamba tahu? so common in the 
Se/arah Melayu is the mu tahu demana ('how do you know?') of 
current Kelantan Malay: and the conversation between Benda- 
hara Sri Maharaja and the children on p. 184, 11. 6.30 has 
(in this text, though not in Shellabear) the emboh now only 
heard on the East Coast. One swallow does not make a sum¬ 
mer: but I feel that there is some ground for thinking that 
were the writer, or at any rate the copyist, to return to earth, 
it is on the East Coast of the Malay Peninsula that he would 
find his patrius sermo. 

4. Papers on Malay Subjects (Second Series), Singapore, 1927. 

5. JMBRAS, 13, Pt 3, 1935. 

J952] Royal Asiatic Society . 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 




The ‘Malay Annals’ 

Chapter 1 


[ 42 ]* 


A preface in praise of Allah, the Prophet and his Companions.- 
How the history came to he written. The story of Raja 
Iskandar. He defeats Raja Kida Hindi and marries his 
daughter, by whom he has a son, Raja Aristun Shah. When 
Raja Kida Hindi dies, he is succeeded by Raja Aristun Shah. 
A list of his successors down to Raja Suran Padshah. 

( Shellabear- f chapter I) 

In the name of God the Merciful, the Compassionate. 
Praise be to God, the Lord of all worlds; and prayers and peace 
be to the Apostle of God (may God bless him and give him 
peace) and to all his Companions likewise. After this praise to* 
God and a prayer to the Apostle of God (may God bless him 
and give him peace) — Now in the year 1021, in a dul al-awal 
year on the 12th ot the month RabiVl-awal, on Sunday, at the 
time of the forenoon prayer, in the reign of Sultan AlaVd-din 
Ri'ayat Shah, shadow of God upon earth, while he had a settle¬ 
ment at Pasir Raja — at that time there came the Sri Nara- 
wangsa, whose name was. Tun Bambang, son of the Sri Agar Raja 
of Petani, with a command from the Ruler in the Lower Reaches 
fainnahu shad ahmakani w’al-zamani (of a truth is he the glory 
of his place and time) waziru majalisi ahlfl-imani (ornament of 
thef 1 gatherings of the faithful) wa nawwara madajat al-taat waT- 
ihsan (and he sheddeth lustre on the steps of loyalty and virtue) 
zayyada fadlah hu wal-imtinan (may God Almighty ever increase 
his excellence and charity) wa abhada ‘adlahu fi sa’iri Tbuldan 
(and establish him for all time with justice over all countries). 
And the behest of his Highness was thus:— "It is my wish that 
the Treasury! 1 * 1 shall make a chronicle setting forth the genealogy! 2 
of the Malay Rajas and the ceremonial or their courts, for the 
information of my descendants who come after me, that they 
may be conversent with the history and derive profit therefrom. 
When fakir alladi murakkabun *,ala jahlin fal-taksir (that is to 
say, your humble servant who is duly conscious of his weakness 
and the limitations of his knowledge) alladi muiakkab ‘ala jahi- 
liah (that is to say, mounted as he is on the steed of his ignor¬ 
ance)—when he heard the word of his Highness, he took the 
command upon his head and his limbs were bowed beneath the 
weight of it. Then did he bestir himself to diligence, at the 
same time praying for help from God, the Creator of the 
Universe, and from His Prophet, the chiefest of mankind. And 
he wrote this chronicle as he received it from his father and his 
forebears, assembling in it all the stories of the men of bygone 
days, for the greater pleasure of his lord the King. And he gave 

* Marginal numbers in square brackets refer to the page number in the Malay 
text edited by Sir Richard Winstedt (JMBRAS, 16, pt. 3. 1938). 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 




translated by C. C. Brown 


1 ? 


[ 42 — 43 ] to it the name of Sulalatu's-Salatina, that is to say, the genealogy 
of kings. Let not him who reads it concern himself with it to the 
exclusion of all else: for thus saith the Prophet (may God bless 
him and give him peace) tafakkaru £ ala’i 'Llahi wa la tafakkaru 
£ dzati y Llahi that is to say, concern thyself with the Majesty of 
God and trouble not thy mind over the Essence of God. Now 
this is how the story begins according to the account! 3 we have 
received:— 

When Raja Iskandar, the Two-Horned, son of Raja Darab, 
a Roman of the country of Macedonia, set out to visit the East, 
he came to the frontier of India. Now there was a certain 
Raja, by name Raja Kida Hindi, whose kingdom was so vast 
that he held sway over half of all India. When he heard of 
the coming of Raja Iskandar he bade his chief minister assemble 
his forces and the princes who were his vassals. And when 
they were gathered together Raja Kida Hindi went out to repel! 4 
Raja Iskandar. And the two armies met and battle was joined, 
as is related in the Hikayat Iskandar. And Raja Kida Hindi was 
defeated by Raja - Iskandar and was captured alive, whereupon 
Raja Iskandar ordered him to accept the True Faith. And he 
didf 5 so and became a Muhammadan, embracing the religion 
of Abraham, the Chosen Friend of God (on him be peace). 
Raja Iskandar then presented him with robes! 6 of honour, 
raiment such as he wore himselff 7 and bade him return to his 
own country. 

Now Raja Kida Hindi had a daughter, ShahruTBariyah by 
name, whose beauty was such that she had no peer at that time: 
brilliant as the light of the sun was the light of her countenance, 
and she was endowed moreover with great wisdom and under¬ 
standing. Calling his chief minister to a place where they would 
be alone, Raja Kida Hindi said to him, “l would have you know 
that I have called you to ask for your advice. This daughter 
of mine who hath no peer among the princesses of this time- 
it is my purpose to offer her to Raja Iskandar. What think 
you' And the chief minister answered,! 8 “What your 
Highness proposes is entirely right and proper/' Raja Kida 
Hindi then said to his chief minister, “So be it, please God. 
To-morrow you go to Nabi Khidlir and tell him of the matter." 
So the minister went to Nabi Khidlir, and when he had gone, 
Raja Kida Hindi gave orders for the name of Raja Iskandar to 
be inscribed on the die of his coins and on his pennons. And 
when the minister came to Nabi Khidlir he gave him greeting, 
and the greeting was returned by Nabi Khidlir, who bade him 
be seated. Then said the chief miniser to Nabi Khidlir, “I 
would have you know, sir, that the Raja whom I serve entertains 

The notes are printed together on pages 205 et seq., at the end of the text.. 
1952] Royal Asiatic Society . 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 




14 


The Malay Annals 

[ 43 — 45 ] for Raja Iskandar such affection as no words of mine can describe. 

And he has a daughter of whom it may be said that from East 
to West no princess can rival her. In beauty, intelligence and 
disposition she has no equal: ] 9 and it is his desire to offer her 
to be the consort of Raja Iskandar.” History then relates that 
Nabi Khidlir went forthwith to Raja Iskandar and related the 
matter to him. Raja Iskandar signified his assent; whereafter he 
went forth to the nail of audience,] 10 where he gave audience 
to princes, divines and theologians, chiefs, warriors and men of 
valour, gathered around the throne, whilst behind the king were 
his chosen retainers and trusted henchmen. Raja Kida Hindi 
too was present before the king, seated on a jewelled chair of 
gold. After all had been seated awhile, Nabi Khidlir (on him 
be peace) rose to his feet, and after invoking the name of God 
Almighty and asking for the blessing of the Prophet Abraham, 
the Chosen Friend of God, and all the prophets of ancient times, 
he read the marriage formula for Raja Iskandar, making a sign 
to Raja Kida Hindi where the words related to him. Thus 
said Nabi Khidlir, “Be it known to you, Raja Kida Hindi, that 
it is to our Raja here present that Almightly God has delivered 
the lordship over the whole earth from East to West, from North 
to South. Now it has come to his knowledge] 11 that you have 
a daughter of surpassing beauty, and he would fain ask that you, 
Raja Kida Hindi, should regard him favourably and accept him 
as your son-in-law, so that your descendants may be connected 
with the descendants of Raja Iskandar without a break until the 
Day of Judgment. What say you? Do you assent or not?” 
History then relates that when Raja Kida Hindi heard the words 
of Nabi Khidlir, he rose from his chair and stood upon the 
ground: whereupon he did obeisance to Raja Iskandar and said, 
“Be it known to your Highness and to all here present, by the 
Prophet of God, that I am in very truth the slave of Raja Iskandar, 
as are all my children] 12 : we are not even as the followers here 
that serve his needs. Verily it is Nabi Khidlir who is guardian 
for myself and for my daughter. Princess Shahru’l-Bariyah.” 
When Nabi Khidlir heard these words of Raja Hindi, he turned 
towards Raja Iskandar and said, “Verily have (?) 13 I given 
Princess Shahru’l-Bariyah in marriage to Raja Iskandar, the 
dowry] 138 that shall be paid by him to be three hundred thousand 
dinar. Do you consent?” And when Raja Iskandar signified his 
consent, the daughter of Raja Kida Hindi was duly wedded by 
Nabi Khidlir to Raja Iskandar following the ordinance of the 
Prophet Abraham (the Chosen Friend of God) in the presence 
of all those aforesaid. Then rose princes, chiefs, ministers,] 14 
warchiefs] 148 , theologians, divines and jurists, and strewed gold, 
silver, gems and precious stones of every kind at the feet of 
Raja Iskandar, until gold and precious stones stood before him 
in heaps like so many anthills. All this treasure was distributed 
as alms to the poor and needy. 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



15 


translated by C. C. Brown 

[ 45 — 46 ] When night fell, Raja Kida Hindi brought his daughter to 
Raja Iskandar with all that she possessed, together with manifold 
precious stones that were heirlooms from her forebears, all of 
which Raja Kida Hindi made over to her for her usef 15 . And 
that night Raja Iskandar ascended the bridal dais: and he was 
astonished at the beauty of Princess Shahru’l-Bariyah which 
surpassed all description. On the following day Raja Iskandar 
gave Princess Shahru’l-Bariyah robes of honour complete with 
royal insignia and bestowed upon her jewellery past all counting, 
whilst to the princes he gave robes of honour with ornaments 
of rich distinction, all of them of gold studded with every sort 
of gem, the content of three treasure chests. And to Raja 
Kida Hindi he gave robes of honourf 16 (together with) a hundred 
golden caskets filled with precious stones and rich gems, and a 
hundred picked horses with trappings of gold studded with every 
sort of gem, so that all beholders were astonished to look upon 
them. 

Raja Iskandar then stayed there for ten days, and on the 
eleventh day he departed with traditional ceremony taking with 
him the princess, daughter of Raja Kida Hindi. He then set 
forth for the East, as is related in the famous history. After a 
time he returned from his visit to the East and stopped on his 
way in India, where Raja Kida Hindi went out to meet him, 
bearing presents of precious stones and rare jewels. Raja Hindi 
then told Raja Iskandar how sorely he had missed him and of 
his devotion to him which no words could describe. He told 
him too how sorely he had missed his daughter, Princess Shahru’l- 
Bariyah, and asked that Raja Iskandar would restore her to him. 
Raja Iskandar then graciously gave Princess Shahru’l-Bariyah back 
to her father, at the same time bestowing upon her a hundred 
silken robes of honour together with gold, silver and precious 
stones, and magnificent gems without number. Raja Kida Hindi 
then did obeisance to Raja Iskandar, who presented him with a 
hundred silken robes of honour that he had himself worn. 
Thereupon the signal-drum was beaten and the trumpet blown, 
betokening Raja lskandar’s departure. And Raja Iskandar took 
his departure, with traditional ceremony, on his mission to 
bring under his suzerainty all Rajas who had not yet acknow¬ 
ledged it, as history relates. God knoweth the truth. To Him 
do we return. 

Now, according to the account we have received, Princess 
Shahru’l-Bariyah, daughter of Raja Kida Hindi, was with child 
by Raja Iskandar, but neither did Raja Iskandar know of this nor 
was the Princess herself aware of her pregnancy. But when a 
month had passed after her return to her father, she realised 
that she was with child by Raja Iskandar as she did not men¬ 
struate. And she informed her father, saying, “I would have 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



16 


The Malay Annals 

|4S—47] 

you know, father, that I have had no menses now for two 
months/'. When Raja Kida Hindi heard the words of his 
daughter, he was delighted that she was with child by Raja 
Iskandar and he lavished due care upon her. And when the 
time was accomplished, Princess Shahru'l-Bariyah brought forth 
a son. And Raja Kida Hindi gave to his grandson the name 
Raja Aristun Shah (Son of a Great King) and great was his 
affection for the child. In due course Aristun Shah grew up to 
be an exceedingly handsome youth, the imagef 17 of his father, 
Raja Iskandar Dzu'l-Karnain, and was betrothed by Raja Kida 
Hindi to the daughter of the Raja of Turkistan. By her Raja 

Aristun Shah had a son whom he called Raja Aftas. 

Forty-five years after the return of Raja Iskandar to Mace¬ 
donia, Raja Kida Hindi returned to God's mercy, and was 

succeded as ruler of India by his grandson, Raja Aristun, who 
reigned three hundred and fifty-five years before he left this 
perishable world to go to the world that abideth. He was succeed¬ 
ed by his son Raja Aftas, who ruled over India for one hundred 
and twenty years and on his death was succeeded by Raja 

Askainat, who reigned for three years. On the death of Raja 
Askainat the throne passed to Raja Kasdas, who reigned for twelve 
years and was succeeded on his death by his younger brother 
Raja Amtabus who reigned for thirteen years. When he died, 
Raja Heruwaskainan came to the throne and reigned for thirty 
years. On his death Raja Arahadaskainat came to the throne 
and reigned for nine years, to be succeeded on his death by 
Raja Gudarz Kuhan, son of Raja Amtabus, who reigned for 
seventy years. On his death Raja Nikabus Ashkabus came to 
the throne, and he ruled for forty years. After that Raja 
Ardashir-i Papagan, son of Raja Gudarz Kuhan, came to the 
throne. He married a daughter of Raja Nushirwan ‘Adil, Raja 
of East and West, and by her he had a son named Derma 
Nus. After he had attained the age of a hundred Raja Ardashir-i 
Papagan died and was succeeded by his son Deria (sic) Nus 
who reigned for ninety years and was succeeded by Raja Kestah. 
He reigned for four months and was succeeded on his death 
by Raja Ramji, who reigned for twenty-two years and nine 
months. When he died, Raja Shah Tersi became king. He 
was the son of Raja Derma Nus and reigned for twenty-eight 
years, to be succeeded on his death by Raja Teja who reigned 
for thirty years. On his death Raja Ajakar came to the throne 
and reigned for ten years. When he died Raja Hurmizd, son 
of Raja Shahi Narsi (Tersi?), became king and reigned for one 
hundred and twenty-six years. After that Raja Yazdigird came 
to the throne and reigned for sixty-two years and four months, 
to be succeeded on his death by Raja Kupi Kudar, who reigned 
for sixty-three years. The next king was Raja Narsi Biradarash, 
son of Raja Zimrut, grandson of Raja Shah Narsi (Tersi?), great- 

journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



translated by C. C. Brown 


17 


[47—48] grandson of Raja Deria (Derma) Nus, great-great-grandson of 
Raja Ardashir-i Papagan, who was the son of Raja Gudarz Kuhan, 
grandson of Raja Amtabus, great grandson of Raja Sabur, great- 
great-grandson of Raja Aftus, the son of Raja Aristun Shah 
who was the son of Raja Iskandar Dzu’l-Karnain. 

Narsi Baradar-ash married a daughter of Raja Amdan Nagara, 
by whom he had two sons Kudar Shah Jahan and Raja Suran 
Padshah, both of them exceedingly handsome. 

God knoweth the truth: to Him do we return. 


Chapter II 


The story of Raja Shulan of Nagapatam. He conquers all 
countries until he comes to Gangga Nagara, where Raja Linggi 
Shah Johan resists him but finally is slain. Raja Shulan marries 
Raja Linggi Shah Johan’s daughter, Onang Kiu, then returns to 
India and founds Bija Nagara. By Onang Kiu he has a daughter, 
Chendana W^asis, whom he marries to Raja Suran Padshah, 
grandson of Raja Iskandar. On his death Raja Shulan is suc¬ 
ceeded by Raja Chulan, who presently decides to invade China 
and gets as far as Temasek (Singapura). The ruse of the 
Chinese to discourage this venture. Raja Chulan s descent 
into the sea and his marriage with the daughter of Raja 
Aftabu’l-Ardl. His return to Kalinga and marriage with the 
daughter of Raja Kudar, ruler of Hindustan. He dies and is 
succeeded by his con, Adirama Raja Mudaliar, whose descen¬ 


dants still rule Bija Nagara. 


(Shellabear, chapter I) 


Here nowf 18 is the story of a certain city in the realm of 
Kalinga: its name was Nagapatam ancl the ruler of this city, 
whose name was Raja Shulan f 19 , was according to some accounts 
a descendant of Raja Nushirwan ‘Adil, son of Raja Kobad 
Shahriar, Raja of the East and the West. Whether that is so 
or not is known only to Almighty God. However that may be, 
this Raja Shulan was a mighty Raja, to whom all the Rajas of 
Sind and India and all the Rajas of the regions below the wind 
were subject. 

Once upon a time Raja Shulan commanded that his count¬ 
less armies be assembled, and the Rajas from every part of the 
country gathered with their men in numbers past counting 
together with their arms and fighting gear. When the whole 
host was complete. Raja Shulan set forth, his purpose being to 
reduce all cities of East and West to subjection to him: and 
with him went the whole countless host. So great was this 
army on the march that forests became treeless plains, hills were 
laid low and rocks sent rolling over and over. Every city in 
Raja Shulan s path fell to him, until he came to a city called 
Gangga Shah, Nagara, the Raja of which was called Raja Lmggi 
Shah. Now this city stood on a hill: and though from the 


1952 ] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



18 


The Malay Annals 

[48—49] front it appeared to stand at a great height, it was quite low 
at the back. Its fort still stands to this day, at Dinding on* the 
other side of the Perak river. When Raja Linggi Shah Johan 
heard of the approach of Raja Shulan, he gave orders for his 
forces to be assembled, the gates of the fort to be shut, the 
moat to be filled with water and the fortifications to be manned. 
Raja Shulan's army advance to surroundf 20 the fort of Raja 
Linggi Shah Johan, but so stout was the defence that his men 
could make no headway. When he saw this, Raja Shulan 
mounted an elephant that was in season and moved in to the 
attack: and though the men of the garrison rained spears and 
arrows upon him, he heeded them not and forced his way up to 
the gate of the fort of Gangga Nagara. He struck the gate of 
the rort with his mace and it crashed to the ground, whereupon 

• he and his war-chiefs entered the fort. When Raja Linggi Shah 

ohan saw Raja Shulan approaching, he stood up and seizing 
lis bow shot an arrow, which struck Raja Shulan's elephant above 
the base of the trunk. The elephant fell sprawling, but Raja 
Shulan leapt from his back and drawing his sword slashed at Raja 
Linggi Shah Johan, severing his neck with the blow, so that his 
head toppled to the earh and he was killed. 

When the men of Gangga Nagara saw that their Raja was 
dead, they broke and fled. After the fall of Gangga Nagara 
Raja Shuan went forward again until in due course he reached 
the frontier of Lenggui. In ancient times Lenggui was a great 
city with its blackstonef 21 fort which still exists. The original 
name of the place was Glang Gui, which means 'treasure chest 
of jewels'; but through our inability to pronounce the name 
properly it has been corrupted into 'Lenggui'. The Raja's name 
was Raja Chulin: he was a mighty king and all princes of lands 
below the wind were subject to him. 

When Raja Chulin heard of the approach of Raja Shulan, 
he gave orders for his forces to be assembled and for the princes 
who were his vassals to be summoned. When all had forega¬ 
thered, Raja Chulin set out to repel Raia Shulan. His army was 
as a sea at full tide, the elephants and horses were like islands 
in the sea, the banners and pennons were like a forest, the wea¬ 
pons were serried row upon row and the hair-pendants on the 
javelins looked like a field of lalang* in blossom. When they had 
advanced some ten miles, the army of Raja Shulan was encounter¬ 
ed and battle was joined. The din was unimaginable. Those 
whof 21a had elephants pitted them against those of their adver¬ 
saries, those who had horses made them bite the foe's horses, 
those who had bows plucked the strings of their bows, 
those who had lances thrust with their lances, those who had 
spears thrust with their spears and those who had swords 

* Long-grass (Imperata cylindrica) 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 





translated by C. C. Brown 


19 


[49—50] hacked with their swords. Weapons fell thick and fast 
like heavy rain. Even had it thundered in the heavens 
the sound would not have been heard for the battle cries of the 
warriors and only the clash of weapon upon weapon would have 
been heard. So thick was the dust of conflict that the light of 
day was darkened as by an eclipse of the sun, and such was the 
confusion that friend could not be told from foe. Attackers were 
themselves attacked, here and there men even stabbed their own 
friends. The dead lay thick on either side, men, elephants and 
horses. The earth was a sea of blood. And when the cloud 
of dust lifted, there they were still fighting desperately, neither 
side yielding an inch. Raja Chulin then brought in his elephant 
to the attack and charged the countless host of Raja Shulan, 
leaving a trail of heaped corpses wherever he charged. Such 
was the carnage in their ranks that the men of Kalinga gave ground. 
When he saw this, Raja Shulan rushedf 22 into the Fray, hurling 
a challenge (?) at Raja Chulin. He was mounted on an elephant 
of prodigious size that was moreover in season and stood eight 
cubits at the shoulder. But the elephant of Raja Chulin was 
no coward, and the two elephants met and fought, with a crash 
like that of a thunderbolt splitting a hill, while the clash of 
tusk on tusk sounded like peal on peal of thunder. Neither 
elephant would own defeat. And Raja Chulin stood up on his 
elephant poising his spear which he then hurled at Raja Shulan: 
and it passed clean through the howdah, projecting a finger span 
on the far side of it. Whereupon Raja Shulan shot an arrow 
and transfixed Raja Chulin through the chest so that he fell 
from his elephant and died. And when the men of Raja Chulin 
saw that he had been killed, they all of them broke and fled, 
hotly pursued by the men of Kalinga who slew any that fell 
into their hands. The men of Kalinga then entered the fort 
of Klenggiu (?Glang Gui) and sacked it, gaining more bootyf 23 
than man could count. Now Raja Chulin had a very beautiful 
daughter called Onang Kiu. She was offered to Raja Shulan, who 
took her as consort. He then returned crowned with victory, and 
when he reached Kalinga he built himself a very great city. Its 
fort was of black stone with walls seven fathoms thick and 
nine fathoms high, and so skilled were the masons that not an 
interstice was to be seen, it was as though the masonry had been 
poured into place. The gate was of hammered gold, with studs 
of gold bejewelled. As for the extent of the fort, there were 
seven mountains! 24 within its compass; and in the midst of 
the city was a lake, so large that it looked like a sea and if an 
elephant stood on the far shore it could not be seen from the 
near shore. Into this lake the king released fish of every sort, 
and in the middle of it stood an island of great height, over 
which vapour constantly hovered as though the summit was 
wrapped in dewy mist. And on this islancl he planted trees! 25 
of all kinds, and every sort of flower and fruit-tree that exists 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society . 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



20 


The Malay Annals 

[SO—51] in this world was to be found there. It was to this island that 
the king resorted for pleasure. And by the side of this island 
he made a great forest into which he released wild beasts of 
every kind; and when he wished go hunting! 26 or to noose 
elepnants, it was to this forest that he went. When the city 
was completed, Raja Shulan gave it the name of Bija-nagara. 
The city exists to this day in the country of Kalinga. Such is 
the history of Raja Shulan that were I to relate the whole of it 
the book would be as thick as the Story of Hamzahf 27 . 

In the course of time Raja Shulan had a child by Princess 
Onang Kiu, a daughter whose beauty was such that she had no 
equal in those times. The king gave to her the name of Princess 
Chendani Wasis. And when she was full grown, her hand in 
marriage was sought by Raja Narsi biradar-ash for his son Raja 
Suran Padshah. Raja Shulan consented and Princess Chendani 
Wasis was married to Raja Suran Padshah. After Raja Suran 
Padshah had been married for some time with Princess Chendani 
Wasis he had three children by her; Raja Jiran, who became 
ruler of Chendragiri Nagara; Raja Chulan, who was adopted 
by his grandparent Sutan Raja; and Raja Pandayan, who became 
ruler of Negapatam. In the course of time Raja Shulan died and 
was succeeded on the throne by his grandson, Raja Chulan. 
He reigned in the stead of his grandfather at Bajaya Nagara, 
and his kingdom was even greater than his grandfather's, for the 
whole of India and Sind was subject to him and every prince 
of East and West was his vassal. It was only China that refused 
to acknowledge his suzerainty. He took steps therefore to invade 
China and gave orders that all his forces be assembled. They 
came together from every part of the country, in numbers past 
counting, and with them came vassal princes, to the number of 
twelve hundred, leading their armies. When all were assembled, 
Raja Chulan set forth to conquer the realm of China: and so 
vast was his army on the march that boundless tracts of forest 
became treeless plains, the earth rocked as though convulsed by 
an earthquake, mountains were moved and their summits came 
toppling down: even the highest hills were brought low and 
mighty rivers ran dry and became land. Six months passed and 
the tail of the column had not yet appeared; the gleam of the 
weapons was so brilliant that dark nights became as bright as 
though there were a full moon shining in fine weather; and 
thunder in the heavens could not have been heard for the din 
and uproar of the advancing host. 

After a time they came to Temasek. And news reached 
China that "Raja Chulan is going to invade our country, with 
an army that no man can number, and is already at Temasek." 
This report caused consternation to the Raja of China, and he 
addressed his ministers and officers, saying, "What think you 
is our best plan for averting this calamity? For if this Raja 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



21 


translated by C. C. Brown 

[51—52] of Kalinga reaches China, assuredly this country of ours will be 
destroyed/' And the chief minister replied, “We will deliberate 
upon the matter, Lord of the Earth/' And the Raja of China 
bade them deliberate. Thereupon the chief minister ordered 
a ship to be made ready and he had it filled with worn-down, 
rusty needles. He then collected a number of kesmak* and 
bedaraf and other fruit trees that had fruited and had them 
planted on board the ship. He chose out also a number of men 
so old that their teeth had all fallen out and they also were 
put on board the ship, which he then ordered to sail to Temasek. 
When the ship reached Temasek, word was brought to Raja 
Chulan that a ship had arrived from China. And Raja Chulan 
ordered men of his to go and inquire of the Chinese how far 
it was from Temasek to China. And they went and asked the 
men in the ship, who replied, “When we left China we were 
all of us mere boys barely turned twelve years old, and these 
fruit trees you see here were planted by us from seed. Now 
we are old men, our teeth have all fallen out and the trees we: 
planted are bearing fruit: and it is only now that we have arrived 
here." And they took several needles and shewed them to the 
Kalinga men, saying, “These pieces of steel were as thick as a 
man's forearm when we left China. See how they are worn 
down to nothing now! That will give you an idea of how lcm^ 
we have been upon our journey, more years than we can reckon.' 
When the Kalinga men heard this, they hastened back to inform 
Raja Chulan and they related to him what they been told. And 
when Raja Chulan heard their words, he said," If it is as the 
Chinese say, China must be a very long way away. When should 
we ever get there? We had better go home." And the war- 
chiefs replied, “What your royal Highness says is very true." 

Now Raja Chulan reflected, “The dry land and all that 
dwells thereon are known to me, but the sea and all that dwells* 
therein — what might they be like? Were it not better then 
that I should descend into the sea so that I may know how 
things are therein?" When he had thus decided, Raja Chulan 
ordered his craftsmen and artificers to be summoned, and they 
were commanded to make a glass case that could be closed and 
opened from within. Thereupon the craftmen and artificers 
made a glass case as the king desired and to it they secured a chain 
of gold. They then brought it to Raja Chulan, who was well 
pleased with the workmanship and bestowed bounty beyond 
measure upon the learned men and artificers. He then entered 
the case, from within which he could see all that was outside, 
and locked the door from within. The case was then lowered 
into the sea and sank. And Raja Chulan had the joyf 23 of 
seeing from within the case all the manifold works of God 

* Harpullia confusa. 
t Zizyphus jujuba. 

J952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 




22 


The Malay Annals 

[52—54] Almighty. Presentlyf 29 by His will the case sank down to the 
country called Dika, whereupon Raja Chulan stepped forth from 
the case and set out to see everything of notef 30 . Presently he 
came upon a vast, strongly built city into which he made his 
way. There he beheld a race of men, the Barsam, so numerous 
that no man, but only Almighty God, could know how many 
they were. But of those people only half were Muslims, the 
rest were unbelievers. And all the inhabitants of the city were 
filled with astonishment when they beheld Raja Chulan and 
they marvelled to see how he was adorned. And they took him 
to their Raja, whose name was Raja AftabuTArdl. And when 
Raja AftabuTArdl beheld Raja Chulan he asked of his servitors, 
“Who is this man?” And they replied, “He is newly come, 
vour Highness, but whence he comes is not known to us.” 
kaja AftabuTArdl then asked Raja Chulan, “Who are you and 
whence are you come hither?” And Raja Chulan answered, “I 
am come from the world. I am the Raja of all mankind, and my 
name is Raja Chulan.” And Raja AftabuTArdl was amazed at 
the words of Raja Chulan and said, “Is there another world 
than this of ours here?” And Raja Chulan answered, “In 
truth this universe is manifold, and manifold are the kinds that 
dwell in it.” And when Raja AftabuTArdl heard the words of 
Raja Chulan he was astounded and exclaimed, “How perfect 
is God, the King Omnipotent!” He then took Raja Chulan 
and seated him upon the throne of sovereignty. 

Now Raja AftabuTArdl had a daughter: the princes's name 
was MathabuTBahri, and she was very beautiful. He gave her 
in marriage to Raja Chulan: and after they had been married 
for three years, Raja Chulan had three sons. But when he 
looked upon his three sons, the heart of Raja Chulan was heavy 
within him and he said, “How will it all end—these three sons 
of mine living here below the earth? Yet how am I to take them 
hence?” So he went to Raja AftabuTArdl and said to him, 
“When these sons of mine come to manhood, I pray you send 
them to the earth so that the kingdom of Raja Iskandar DzuT 
Karnain may not pass away but may continue for all time.” 
And Raja AftabuTArdl agreed. Raja Chulan then sought per¬ 
mission of Raja AftabuTArdl to depart and leave the sea to return 
to the earth, and the king and his consort wept together bitterly. 
Then Raja AftabuTArdl gave orders to bring a winged stallion, 
called the Horse of the River, which he gave to Raja Chulan. 
And Raja Chulan mounted the steed, which bore him up from 
out of the sea into the sky. And as the steed travelled over the 
sea, the subjects of Raja Chulan saw that he who was mounted 
on the steed was indeed Raja Chulan. His minister therefore 
got a handsomef 31 mare and took her to the shore of Bentiri, 
and when the stallion, Horse of the River, beheld the mare, he 
came ashore and drew near to her. Raja Chulan then dismount- 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



23 


translated by C. C. Brown 

[54] ed and the stallion went back into the sea. Then said Raja 
Chulan to his learned men and artificers, “Make for me a token 
to commemorate my visit to the depths of the sea, and it is my 
desire that it be a token which shall endure to the Day of 
Judgment. And let there be recorded upon it the whole history of 
what I have done so that it may be known and understood by 
all that come after me/' When they heard the command of 
Raja Chulan, the artificers split a rock in two and they made a 
record in writing in the Hindustani language. When this was 
done, Raja Chulan ordered a quantity of precious things—gold, 
silver, jewels gems and rare stones of every kind—to be put into 
(the rock chamber?), saying, “There shall come a day when a 
prince of my line shall possess this treasure, and it is that prince 
who shall make all lands below the wind subject to him." 
Thereafter Raja Chulan set forth on his return to Kalinga and 
when he had reached Bija Nagara he married the daughter of 
Raja Kudar Shah Jahan, son of Raja Narsi biradar-ash, the Raja 
of Hindustan. By her he had a son, to whom he gave the name 
of Adiraja Rama Mudaliar. Raja Chulan then died and was 
succeeded at Bija Nagara by his son Ariraja Rama Mudaliar. To 
this day it is the descendants of this Adiraja Rama Mudaliar 
who rule Biji Nagara. 

God knoweth the truth. To Him do we return. 

Chapter III 

The story of Wan Empok and Wan Malini and the miracles 
that happened to the rice they had grown on a clearing on 
Bukit Si-Guntang Mahameru in Palembang. To this hilltop come 
Bichitram, Paladutani and Nilatanam, princely descendants of 
Alexander; and they tell Wan Empok and Wan Malini the 
story of Alexander’s marriage with the daughter of Raja Kida 
Hindi and Raja Chulan’s descent into the sea. The ruler of 
Palembang takes the three young princes to Palembang, whither 
come rajas of all countries to do homage to them. The eldest 
of the princes becomes ruler of Minangkabau with the title of 
Sang Sapurba; the second becomes ruler of Tanjong Pura with 
the title of Sang Maniaka and the youngest stays at Palembang 
with Demang Lebar Daun, the ruler, who abdicates in his favour 
and makes him ruler with the title of Sang Utama. The birth 
of Bath from foam out of the mouth of a white cow belonging 
to Wan Empok and Wan Malini. Bath reads a chiri or coro¬ 
nation formula giving Sang Utama the new title of Sri Tri Buana. 
Sri Tri Buana’s thirty-nine brides. He goes to Temasek and 
founds a city there to which he gives the name of Singapura. 
After a reign of forty-eight years Sri Tri Buana dies and is 
buried on Singapore Hill. Succeeded by his son with the title 
of Paduka Sri Pikrama Wira. Appointments of Bendahara, 
Perdana Mentri and Temenggong. The growth and fame of 
the new city of Singapura. 

(Shellabear, chapter II, III and IV, but the story differs appreciably 
from that of this text: see R. O. W’s summary on pp. 2 and 3). 


1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



24 


The Malay Annals 

154—55] Here now is the story of a city called Palembang in the 

land of Andelas. It was ruled by Demang Lebar Daun, a descen¬ 
dant of Raja Shulan, and its river was the Muara Tatang. In the 
upper reaches of the Muara Tatang was a river called the Melayu, 
and on that river was a hill called Si-Guntang Mahameru. In 
that region lived two widows, Wan Empok and Wan Malini, 
and the t;wo of them had planted padi on Bukit Si-Guntang. 
Much ground had they planted and their padi had thriven beyond 
words. When the padi was ripe over the whole field f 32 , it 
happened that one night Wan Empok and Wan Malini beheld 
from their house a glow as of fire on Bukit Si-Guntang. And 
they said, "Can that be the light of firef 33 that glowsf 34 yonder? 
It frightensf 35 me." Then said Wan Malini, "Whisht! It may 
be the gleam of the gem on some great dragon's head!" So 
Wan Empok and Wan Malini kept quiet in their fear and 
presently they fell asleep. When day dawned, Wan Empok and 
Wan Malini arose from their sleep and bathed their faces, and 
Wan Empok said to Wan Malini, "Come, let us go and see 
what it was that glowed like fire last night". Wan Malini 
agreed, and the two of them climbed up Bukit Si-Guntang, 
where they saw that their padi had golden grain, leaves of silver 
and stems of gold alloy. And when they saw what had happened 
to their padi, they said, "This is what we saw last night!" And 
as they walked along the hill they saw that the crest had turned 
into gold. According to one tradition it has a colour as of gold 
to this day. And on this land that had been turned into gold 
Wan Empok and Wan Malini beheld three youths of great 
beauty. All three of them were adorned like kings and wore 
crowns studded with precious stones, and they rode upon white 
elephantsf 36 . Wan Empok and Wan Malini were lost in wonder 
and utterly amazed at the sight of these youths who were so 
handsome, bore themselves with such grace and were so brilliant¬ 
ly adorned. And they thought in their hearts, "Was it perchance 
because of these three youths that our padi has grain of gold, 
leaves of silver and stems of gold alloy and that this hilltop has 
been turned into gold?" And they asked the three youths, 
"Whence come you, sirs? Are you sons of genies or sons of 
fairies? For wef 37 have long been here without seeing anyone. 
Until you appeared to-day no human being has visited this place." 

And the three youths made answer, "Not from the breed 
of genies or fairies are we. We are descended from Raja 
Iskandar Dzul-Karnain: of the lineage of Raja Nushirwan, Lord 
of the East and the West, are we. Our line springs from Raja 
Sulaiman (upon him be peace) : one of us is called Bichitram, 
one Paludatani and one Nilatanam." Then said Wan Empok 
and Wan Malini, "If you are of the stock of Raja Iskandar, what 
brings you here?" And the three youths then told Wan Empok 
and Wan Malini the story of the marriage of Raja Iskandar with 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



translated by C. C. Brown 2> 

[55—56] Raja Kida Hindi's daughter and of the descent of Raja Chulan 
into the sea. And Wan Empok and Wan Malini said, “What 
have you to prove the truth of what you say?" And the three 
youths answered, “These crowns that we wear are the sign: they 
shew that we are of the stock of Raia Iskandar DzulTKarnaim 
If you doubt our word, the proof is that because we alighted on 
this spot your padi has grain of gold, leaves of silver and stems 
of gold alloy and this hilltop has been turned into gold." And 
Wan Empok and Wan Malini believed the words of the three 
young princes, and they were filled with joy and took the three 
young princes to their house. And the padi was reaped, and 
Wan Empok and Wan Malini became rich because of their 
meeting with the princes. 

According to the account we have received the city of 
Palembang which has been mentioned was the same as the 
Palembang of to-day. Formerly it was a very great city, the like 
of which was not to be found in the whole country of Andelas. 
Now when the Raja of Palembang, whose name was Demang 
Lebar Daun, had heard the story of how Wan Empok and Wan 
Malini had met with princes who had come down from heaven, 
he went to the house of Wan Empok and Wan Malini to see 
the princes, whom he then took back with him to the city. 
And it was noised over the whole country that descendants of 
Raja Iskandar DzuTKarnain were now in Palembang, having 
come down fromf 38 Bukit Si-Guntang Mahameru. Thereupon 
every ruler from every part of the country came to pay his respects 
to them. The eldest of the princes was taken I 39 bv the people 
of Andelas to their country and was made Raja at Menangkabau r 
with the title of Sang Sapurba. Thereafter came the people of 
Tanjong Puraf 39n and took the second of the three princes to 
Tanjong Pura where they made him Raja with the title of Sang 
Maniaka, whilst the youngest of the three princes remained at 
Palembang with Demang Lebar Daun, who made him Raja of 
Palembang with the title of Sang Utama. Demang Lebar Daun 
thereupon abdicated and became chief minister. 

Now Wan Empok and Wan Malini had a cow, silvery white 
in colour. And one day by the will of God this cow spewedf 40 
foam from its mouth. From this foam came forth a human being 
called Bath, who stood up and said, “Hailf 41 to his Highness, 
the Sri Maharaja, ruler of the whole Suvarna-bhumi, whose 
diadem is adorned with the happiness of strength and victory. . . 

adornment of the three worlds. . .law-gone for protection. . . 

throne. .. sunrise of valour jewel... with gods and demons. .. . 
to the time of the dissolution of the Universe, the coronal wreath 
of the righteous king, the king, the supreme lord." And Bath 
gave to the Raja the title of Sri Tri Buana. [It is from the 
descendants of Bath that the readers of the chin*! 42 in ancient 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



26 


The Malay Annals 

[56—57] times traced their origin] And Sri Tri Buana became famous 
as a ruler; and all mankind, male and female, came from every 
part of the country to pay their homage to him, all of them 
bringing offerings for his acceptance. On all who came to 
present themselves before him Sri Tri Buana bestowed robes of 
honour, giving to all the men the title of Awang and to all the 
women the title of Dara. This was the origin of the institution 
of (?) The Corps of Noble Youthsf 42a and The Company 
of Maids of Honour. When Sri Tri Buana was established 
on the throne, he wished for a consort; and wherever! 43 
there was to be found a beautiful daughter of a prince 
he took her to wife! 44 . But any such princess, when she 
slept with the king, was found by him the following morning to 
be stricken with cnloasma as the result of being possessed! 45 by 
him, whereupon he abandoned her. To no less than thirty-nine 
princesses had this happened. Now it came to the king s ears 
that Demang Lebar Daun had a daughter! 46 , Wan Sendari by 
name, whose beauty was such that she had no equal in those 
days. Sri Tri Buana asked (?)t 47 Demang Lebar Daun for her 
hand in marriage; but Demang Lebar Daun replied, “If your 
Highness avails himself of your humble servant's daughter, she 
will assuredly be stricken with chloasma. But if your Highness 
desires your humble servant's daughter, then must your Majesty 
make a covenant with your humble servant, whereupon your 
humble servant will offer her for your Majesty's acceptance." 
[It was Demang Lebar Daun who was the author of the expres¬ 
sions “your Majesty" and “your humble servant"] And Sri 
Tri Buana asked, “What is this undertaking that you would have 
of me?" Demang Lebar Daun answered, “Your Highness, the 
descendants of your humble servant shall be the subjects of your 
Majesty's throne, but they must be well treated by your descend¬ 
ants. If they offend, they shall not, however grave be their offence, 
be disgraced or reviled with evil words: if their offence is grave, 
let them be put to death, if that is in accordance with Muham¬ 
madan law. 

And the king replied, “I agree to give the undertaking for 
which you ask: but I in my turn require an undertaking from 
you, sir." And when Demang Lebar Daun asked what the under¬ 
taking was, the king answered, “that your descendants shall never 
for rest of time be disloyal to my descendants, even if my 
descendants oppress them and behave evilly." And Demang 
Lebar Daun said, “Very well, your Highness. But if your 
descendants depart from the terms of the pact, then so will mine." 
And Sri Tri Buana replied, “Very well, I agree I agree to that 
covenant": whereupon both of them took a solemn oath to 
the effect that whoever departed from the terms of the pact, let 

* Formula (in a non-Malayan tongue) pronounced at the installation of a 
Sultan or the investiture of a Chief (Winstedt). 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 




27 


translated by C. C. Brown 

[57—58] his house be overturned by Almighty God so that its roof be 
laid on the ground and its pillars be inverted. And that is why 
it has been granted by Almighty God to Malay rulers that they 
shall never put their subjects to shame, and that those subjects 
however gravely they offend shall never be boundf 48 or hanged 
or disgraced with evil words. If any ruler puts a single one of 
his subjects to shamef 49 , that shall be a sign that his kingdom 
will be destroyed by Almighty God. Similarly it has been granted 
by Almighty God to Malay subjects that they shall never be 
disloyal or treacherous to their rulers, even if their rulers behave 
evilly or inflict injustice upon them. 

When the covenant had been made and strict promises 
mutually given, Princess Wan Sendari was offered by Demang 
Lebar Daun to Sri Tri Buana, and Sri Tri Buana was wedded to 
the princess, daughter of Demang Lebar Daun. And when night 
had fallen, the king slept with the princess: and when day 
dawned he saw that she was not stricken with chloasma. And 
the king was overjoyed and ordered Demang Lebar Daun to be 
informed. And Demang Lebar Daun came forthwith, and he 
too was overjovedf 50 to see that his daughter was unscathed and 
that no harm had befallen her. 

Demang Lebar Daun then made preparations for the 
ceremonial lustration] 51 of Sri Tri Buana, and he ordered a 
seven-tiered bathing pavijlion to be built with five spires. The 
construction was of the finest quality and it was Bath's workman¬ 
ship. When it was finished; Demang Lebar Daun initiated the 
festivities that were to be celebrated day and night for forty days 
and forty nights, with feasting, drinking and entertainment of 
every kind, in which participated princes, ministers] 52 , cour¬ 
tiers, heralds, war-chiefs and all the people, to the accompani¬ 
ment of music that rolled like thunder. Many were the buffaloes, 
oxen and sheep that were slaughtered: the rice-refuse from the 
cooking-pots was piled mountain-high and the boiling water was 
like a sea in which the heads of slaughtered buffaloes and oxen 
were so many islands. 

When the forty days and forty nights were accomplished, 
the ceremonial water was borne in procession to the accompani¬ 
ment of everv sort of music, and the vessels containing the water 
were all of them of gold studded with jewels. The Sri Tri 
Buana with his bride, Princess Wan Sendari, were borne in 
procession seven times round the pavilion, and they were then 
lustrated on the central platform, the ceremony being performed 
by Bath. When the lustration was accomplished, Sri Tri Buana 
took off his towel wrap and donned his apparel, his sarong being 
of darapata] 52 * 1 darmani, while Wan Sendari also donned a 
sarong of burudaimani: and both were invested with the complete 
insignia of sovereignty, whereupon they took their seats in the 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



28 


The Malay Annals 

158—59] appointed place on the golden dais. The ceremonial rice was 
then borne # in procession to the dais, and the king and his bride 
partook thereof. And when they had eaten, the royal head- 
ornaments were biought in procession and placed by Bath on 
the king's head and his bride's. Thereupon Sri Tri Buana pro¬ 
ceeded to give robes of honour to his chiefs: after which Sri Tri 
Buana wentf 53 into the palace and all who had been present at 
the ceremony returned to their homes. 

After Sri Tri Buana had been living for some time at 
Palembang he planned! 54 to visit the coast and he sent for 
Demang Lebar Daun, who came forthwith. And Sri Tri Buana 
said to him, “I am thinking of going to the coast to find a 
suitable site for a city. What say you?" And Demang Lebar 
Daun replied, ''As your Highness pleases. If your Majesty goes, 
I will accompany you, for I must not be parted from your High¬ 
ness." Then said Sri Tri Buana, “Please then have ships made 
ready." And Demang Lebar Daun, did obeisance and left the 
palace to call men to prepare the craft. When this was done, 
Demang Lebar Daun arranged for his younger brother to remain 
at Palembang in his absence, saying, “I am leaving you here in 
charge of the city as I am going with his Majesty, accompanying 
him whenever he may go." And his brother replied, “Very well: 
no wish of yours will I disobey." 

Sri Tri Buana then set forth, he in the royal (golden) 
yachtf 55 for the menfolk and the queen in the silver yacht, while 
Demang Lebar Daun, the ministers and the war-chiefs had each 
their own craft. So vast was the fleet that there seemed to be 
no counting it; the masts of the ships were like a forest of trees, 
their pennons and streamers were like driving clouds and the 
state umbrellas of tne Rajas like cirrus. So many were the craft 
that accompanied Sri Tri Buana that the sea seemed to be noth¬ 
ing but ships. 

After leaving Kuala Palembang they crossed over the Selat 
Sepat, and from theie they sailed on to Selat Sambar. Mean¬ 
while the news had come to Ben tan f 56 after they had sailed from 
Palembang, that “a Raja from Bukit Si-Guntang, who is descended 
from Raja Iskandar Dzu'l-Karnain, is on his way here and is now 
at Selat Sambar." 

Now Bentan was ruled by a woman, called Wan Sri Benian, 
though according to one tradition her name was Queen Sakidar 
Shah. She was a great Raja, and at that time it was she who 
visited Sham. It was Queen Sakidar Shah who first institute the 
drumf 57 of sovereignty, which practice was followed by other 
Rajas. When she heard the news of the coming of Sri Tri Buana, 
she commanded her ministers, Indra Bopal and Aria Bopal to 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



translated by C. C. Brown 


29 


[59 — 60] bring him to Ben tan. [At that time the fleet of Ben tan was four 
hundred sail]*. And Wan Sri Benian said to India Bopal, “If 
this Raja is old, say to him Tour younger sister sends her obei- 
sance’t 57a , but if he is young, say Tour mother sends her 
greetings/ 

So Indera Bopal and Aria Bopal set outf 58 , and the ships of 
the party sent to bring Sri Tri Buana to Bentan were strung out 
in one unbroken line from Tanjong Rungas to Selat Sambar. 
And when they came up with Sri Tri Buana, Indra Bopal and 
Aria Bopal perceived that he was very young, and they said to 
him, “Your mother sends greetings and invites your Highness 
to Bentan.” So Sri Tri Buana proceeded to Bentan and went 
into the palacef 59 to Wan Sri Benian as she was called. Now 
the purpose of Wan Sri Benian had been to marry Sri Tri Buana, 
but when she saw how young he was she adopted him instead 
as her son and shewed such affection for him that she had him 
installed at Bentan as her successor, to the beat of the drum of 
sovereignty. After he had been there for a time, Sri Tri Buana 
one day sought permission to make an expedition to Tanjong 
Bemianf 60 for sport, and the queen replied, “Why got 61 so far 
afield for your sport, my son? In Bentan are there not deer and 
mouse-deer withf 61a enclosures into which to drive them? Are 
there not barking-deer and porcupines with cages in which to 
capture them? Are there not fish in our pools and every 
sort of fruit and flower in our gardens? Why is it that you 
want to go so far afield for your sport?” And Sri Tri Buana 
answered, “If I am not permitted to go, then I shall die, whether 
I sit down or stand up or whatever I do.” Whereupon Wan Sri 
Benian said, “Rather than you should die, go, my son.” 

And the queen ordered Indra Bopal and Aria Bopal to have 
craft made ready. And when that was done, Sri Tri Buana set 
out with his consort. And the whole fleet—royal yachts, ships 
for sleeping, ships for the menfolk, wherries that were paddled, 
kitchen boats, dug-outs for fishing with the casting-net and float¬ 
ing bath-houses—(put out to sea), with a countless host of escort¬ 
ing vessels. 

And when they were come to Tanjong Bemian, the king 
went ashore for a picnic on the sand, and his consort accompanied 
by the wives of the chiefs went ashore also to picnic on the sand 
and enjoy herself collecting shellfish. And she sat under a screw- 
pine, with the wives of the chiefs in attendance upon her, happily 
watched her handmaids amusing themselves, each one in her own 
way, some gathering shellfish, some digging up barai*, some pick¬ 
ing mangrove flowers and making nosegays, some picking 

* Passages enclosed in square brackets are in the text but are parentheses, 
breaking the thread of the narrative. 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 




30 


The Malay Annals 

[ 60 — 61 ] teruntumi to wear in their hair, some picking bananas and cook¬ 
ing them, some picking butun§ leaves, some picking sponges and 
playing with them, some getting sea-worms and making salad with 
them, some getting sea-weed for jelly and salad—all of them dis¬ 
porting themselves to their heart's content, each in her own 
fashion. 

Now Sri Tri Buana and all the men went hunting! 62 and 
great was the quantity of game that fell to them. And it happened 
that a deer passed in front of Sri Tri Buana and though he speared 
it in the back, the deer escaped. Sri Tri Buana followed it up 
and again speared it, this time through the ribs: and the deer 

could not escape and fell dead. And Sri Tri Buana came to a 

very large, high rock! He climbed on to the top of 
this rock and looking across the water he saw that 

the land on the other side had sand so white that 

it looked like a sheet of (?)f 63 cloth. And he asked Indra 
Bopal, "What is that stretch of sand that we see yonder? What 
land is that?" And Indra Bopal answered, "That, your High¬ 
ness, is the land called Temasek." And Sri Tri Buana said, "Let 
us go thither." And Indra Bopal replied, "I will do whatever 
your Highness commands." So Sri Tri Buana embarked and 
started on the crossing! 64 . And when they were come out into 
the open sea, a storm arose and the ship began to fill with water. 
Bale as they might they could not clear her and the boatswain 
gave order to lighten the ship. But though much was thrown 
overboard, they still could not bale the ship dry. She was by 
now close to Telok Blanga, and the boatswain said to Sri Tri 
Buana, "It seems to me, your Highness, that it is because of the 
crown of kingship that the ship is foundering. All else has been 
thrown overboard, and if we do not likewise with this crown 
we shall be helpless with the ship." And Sri Tri Buana replied, 
‘'Overboard with it then!" And the crown was thrown overboard. 
Thereupon the storm abated, and the ship regained her buoyancy 
and was rowed to land. And when they reached the shore, the 
ship was brought close in and Sri Tri Buana went ashore with 
all the ship s company and they amused themselves with collect¬ 
ing shell-fish. The king then went inland for sport on the open 
ground at Kuala Temasek. 

And they all beheld a strange animal. It seemed to move 
with great speed; it had a red body and a black head; its breast 
was white; it was strong and active in build, and in size was 
"rather bigger than a he-goat. When it saw the party, it moved 
away and then disappeared. And Sri Tri Buana inquired of all 
those who were with him, "What beast is that?"But no one 

* A shell, unid. 
t Lumnitzera spp.? 

X Barringtonia spp. 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV. Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 




31 


translated by C., C. Brown 

[ 61 — 62 ] knew. Then said Demang Lebar Daun, "Your Highness, I have 
heard it said that in ancient times it was a lion that had that 
appearance. I think that what we saw must have been a lion.” 
And Sri Tri Buana said to Indra Bopal, "Go back to Bentan 
and tell the queen that now we shall not be returning, but that 
if she wishes to shew her affection for us, will she furnish us 
with men, elephants and horses, as we propose to establish a city 
here at Temasek.” And Indra Bopal set forth to return to 
Bentan : and when he arrived there, he presented himself before 
Wan Sri Benian to whom he related what Sri Tri Buana had 
said. "Very well,” said Wan Sri Benian,” we will never oppose 
any wish of our son.” And she sent men, elephants and horses 
without number. Sri Tri Buana then established a city at 
Temasek, giving it the name of Singapura. And after he had 
dwelt for some time at Singapura he had two children, both sons, 
by Princess Wan Sendari, daughter of Demang Lebar Daun. And 
Wan Sri Benianf 04 * died, leaving two grand-daughters: they were 
married to the two sons of Sri Tri Buana. 

And when Sri Tri Buana had ruled for forty-eight years then 
in the processf 65 of time he died, as did Demang Lebar Daun, 
and they were buried on the hill of Singapura. Sri Tri Buana 
was succeeded by his elder son, whose title as ruler was Paduka Sri 
Pikrama Wira, and Tun Perpateh Permuka Berjajar became Benda- 
hara: it was he who gave audience in the hall of audience instead 
of Paduka Sri Pikrama whenever the king himself did not appear. 
If it was Tun Perpateh Permuka Berjajar who sat in the hall of 
audience, he would rise to greet a prince who was heir to the 
throne but for no other prince would he risef 06 : and if he himself 
went into the royal presence, over the place where he was to sit 
a carpet would be spread, and when he went home after the 
king had retired, he would be escorted by the chiefs, major and 
minor. Now there was a son of Demang Lebar Daun whom 
Paduka Sri Paduka Wira madef 67 chief minister with the title of 
Perpatah Permuka Sekalar. He had the same rank (in the hall 
of audience) as the Bendahara. (? Below the Bendahara sat the 
Penghulu Bendahari) with the title of Tun Jana Buga Dendang. 
In front of (? below) the Penghulu Bendahari sat the Temeng- 
gong with the title of Tun Jana Putra....?, while below the 
Temenggong sat the principal war-chief with the title of Tun Tem- 
purong Gemeratokan. After them came the ministers,! 08 minor 
chiefs, knightsf 09 and courtiers, heralds and war-chiefs, in accord¬ 
ance withf 70 the custom dating from ancient times. And Paduka 
Sri Pikrama Wira had a son, who was known as Raja Muda. And 
Singapura became a great city, to which foriegners resorted in 
great numbers so that the fame of the city and its greatness 
spread throughout the world. 

God knoweth the truth. To Him do we return. 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 




32 


The Malay Annals 

Chapter IV 

The great Kingdom of Majapahit and its ruler, the Batara. His 
quarrel with Singapore: the episode of the wood-shaving and 
Sri Pikrama Wira's riposte. The unsuccessful attack of Maja¬ 
pahit on Singapore. 

( Shellabear , Chapter V) 

[ 62 — 63 ] Here now is the story of the Batara of Majapahit, who traced 
his descent from heaven. He had married the daughter of the Raja 
of Tanjong Puraf 71 , who was a Raja from Bukit Si-Guntang and 
by her he had two sons, the elder of whom he installed (to 
succeed him) as ruler at Majapahit. The Raja of Majapahit 
was descended from Princess Semaningrat, and he was known 
as the Batara of Majapahit. So great was his kingdom that 
every prince in the land of Java was subject to him, as were half 
of the princes of Nusantara. 

When the Batara of Majapahit heard that Singapura was 
a great city but that its ruler did not acknowledge the Batara 
as overlord, he was very angry. And he sent envoys to Singapura 
taking with them as the customary present a wood-shaving seven 
fathoms long, which had been cut without a break in it: it was 
as thin as paper and rolled up in the form of a girl's ear-stud. 
The envoys set sail for Singapura, which they reached in due 
course. On their arrival Paduka Sri Pikrama Wira ordered that 
they be duly welcomed. The envoys then presented themselves 
before the king and laid before him the letter and the customary 

{ ^resent accompanying it. Paduka Sri Pikrama Wira read the 
etter, which ran as follows:—"Behold, younger brother, the skill 
of Javanese artificers. Are there in Singapura artificers as skilled 
as this?" And the king ordered the present to be opened, where¬ 
upon he beheld a wood-shaving rolled up like an ear-stud. And 
he smiled, for he realised what was in the mind of the Batara 
of Majapahit, and he said, "It is in disparagement of our man¬ 
liness that the Batara of Majapahit sends us a girl's ear-stud!" 
But the envoys replied, "No, your Highness, that was not the 
intention of your Highness's elder brother. What he says is, "Is 
there at your Highness's feet a man who can use an adze like 
that?" 

When Paduka Sri Pikrama Wira heard the words of the 
envoys, he answered, "Even greaterf 72 than that is the skill of 
craftsmen we have!" And he ordered a carpenter named Sang 
Ben tan to be sent for: and when he came, the king ordered a 
boy to be fetched, and he bade the carpenter shave the hair off 
the boy's head with his adze, in front of the envoys. And the 
carpenter proceeded to shave the boy's head: and though the 
boy cried and kept moving his head this way and that, the 
carpenter went on with his work and in the twinkling of an 
eye the hair was gone as though it had been taken off with a 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



35 


translated by C. C. Brown 

[ 63 — 64 ] razor. The envoys were astounded, and Sri Pikrama Wira said 
to them, 'There's skill for you! A man who can shave a boy's 
head with his adze would laughf 72a at the task of making a wood- 
shaving like that! Take this adze to Majapahit and crave our 
brothers acceptance of it!" And the Javanese envoys sought 
leave to return to their country, and they took with them as a 
customary present the adze which the carpenter had used for 
shaving the boy's head: and their ship set sail from Singapura. 

And when in due course they reached Java, the envoys landed 
and presented themselves before the Batara of Majapahit, to 
whom they gave the letter and the present from the Raja of 
Singapura, at the same time relating how the carpenter had 
shaved the boy's head with his adze and what Sri Pikrama Wira 
had said. And the Batara was very angry when he heard the 
envoy's story and said, “What the Raja of Singapura means is 
that if we go there, our heads will be shaved as was the boy's!" 
And he ordered his war-chiefs to have a fleet made ready for an 
attack on Singapura, one hundred ships of the line togetlier with 
small craft beyondf 72b number. And the Batara appointed one of 
his leading war-chief to command the fleet: and he sailed for 
Singapura, where he arrived in due course. And the Javanese 
troops landed and fought the men of Singapura; and a greatf 7a 
battle ensued. Loud rang weapon on weapon; terrifying was the 
roar of the warriors shouting; the din was unimaginable. Onf 74 
either side many were killed and the ground flowed with blood. By 
the evening the Javanese had retreated and gone back on board their 
side many were killed and the ground flowed with blood. By the 
evening the Javanese had retreated and gone back on board their 
ships. So long is the story of the battle between Singapura and 
Java that were I to tell it in detail, listeners would nave more 
than their fill. That is why I shorten it, for diffuseness makes 
no appeal to the intelligent. But Singapura fell not and the 
Javanese returned to Majapahit. 

Chapter V 

The Ruler of Bija Nagara ha* a beautiful daughter, Talai 
Pachudi, and Paduka Sri Pikrama Wira sends his minister to 
ask for her hand for his son, Raja Muda. Raja Muda succeeds 
his father and is styled Sri Rana Wikrama. The story of 
Badang, Sri Rana Wikrama’s strong man. 

(The earlier part of this chapter will be found in Shellabear, chapter IV : 
but most of it , viz. the story of Badang, is in Chapter VI of Shellabear). 

Here now is the story of Adirama Raja Mudaliar, a son of 
Raja Chulan. He was Raja at Bija Nagara and had a son named 
Jambuga Raja Mudaliar. When Adirama Raja Mudaliar had died, 
his son, Jambuga Raja Mudaliar, came to the throne. And he 
had a daughter, Princess Talai Puchudi by name, of remarkable 
beauty. The fame of her beauty was spread from country to 
country, but although any number of princes sought her hand 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



34 


The Malay Annals 

in marriage, Raja Jambuga Rama Mudaliar rejected their suit, 
saying, 'They are not of lineagef 75 such as mine/' 

And news came to Singapura of the beauty of the princess, 
daughter of the Raja of Kalinga: and Paduka Sri Pikrama Wira 
appointedf 75a Maha Indra Bopal to go as envoy to Kalinga to ask 
for the hand of Princess Talai Puchudi for his son, Raja Muda. 
So Maha Indra Bopal set sail for Kalinga, and many craft accom¬ 
panied his ship. And when he reached Bija Nagara, Raja Muda¬ 
liar ordered the letter and the gift which came with it to be 
brought with ceremony from the ship: and they were then borne 
in procession with every mark of distinction. 

When the letterf 76 had been read and interpreted, Raja 
Jambuga Rama Mudaliar was well pleased, and he said to Maha 
Indra Bopal, "I am in full accord with my brother's proposal. 
But I would not trouble him to send his son hither; I will send 
my daughter to Singapura." Maha Indra Bopal then sought 
leave to return and Raja Jambuga Rama Mudaliar gave him a 
letter and a present to the Raja of Singapura, whereupon Maha 
Indra Bopal set sail and in due course arrived at Singapura. And 
Sri Pikrama Wira ordered that the letter be borne in procession 
with the honours accorded to great Rajas. And when it reached 
the hall of audience, it was received by the herald and presented 
to Sri Pikrama Wira, who ordered that it be read. And when 
it had been interpreted to the king, he was well pleased; and 
when he received from Maha Indra Bopal the message he brought 
from Raja Jambuga Rama Mudaliar, his pleasure was even greater. 
And when the next sailing season came round, Raja Jambuga 
Rama Mudaliar ordered ships to be made ready. And when they 
were ready, the king ordered one of his war-chiefs to escort 
Princess Talai Puchudi, his daughter, and she embarked in a 
ship accompanied by five hundred maids of honour. The war- 
chief then set sail with the princess, accompanied by a large 
number of decked ships, to say nothing of shallops and batels. 

When they reached Singapura, Paduka Sri Pikrama Wira 
came out as far as Tanjong Bums to meet! 77 them, (? received! 78 
them with) every mark of honour and distinction (and escorted 
them to Singapura). On their arrival, Paduka Sri Pikrama Wira 
initiated the day and night festivities for the wedding of his son 
with the princess, daughter of the Raja of Kalinga. The festivities 
lasted for three months. Raja Pikrama Wira then celebrated the 
wedding of Princess Talai Puchudi (with his son). After the 
wedding the Kalinga war-chief sought leave to return to his 
country, and when Paduka Sri Pikrama Wira had given him a 
letter and a present for the Raja of Kalinga, the envoy! 79 returned 
to Kalinga. 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



[ 65 — 66 ] 


translated by C. C. Brown 35 

After a while, when Paduka Sri Pikrama Wira had com¬ 
pleted fifteen years on the throne, then in the process of time he 
diedf 80 and was succeeded on the throne by his son, Raja Muda, 
with the title of Sri Rana Wikerma as ruler. He had two children 
by Princess Talai Puchudi, daughter of the Raja of Kalinga; 
one son, named Dam Raja, and one daughter. 


Now Tun Perpateh Muka Berjajar had died and was suc¬ 
ceeded as Bendahara by his son with the title of Tun Perpateh 
Tulus. And Tun Perpateh Tulus had two children, a son and 
a daughter whose name was Demi Putri. She was married 
by Sri Rana Wikerma to his son, while the son of Tun Perpateh 
Tulus was married by the king to his daughter. 


Now King Sri Rana Wikerma had a war-chief, called 
Badang, who was possessed of very great strength. Badang 
originally came from Sayong on the mainland. He was the 
slave of a Sayong man, for whom he worked day in, day out 
felling forest. Once upon a time Badang set a fish-trap in the 
Besisek river; and when hef 81 raised (?) the trap, he found it 
was empty, with not a fish in it, though there were fish scales 
and fish bones in the trap. This happened day after day. The 
fish scales he would throw away into the river: hence the river 
was called Sisek (? Besisek). And Badang reflected, "What can 
it be that eats the fish in this trap? I had better watch secretly 
to find out what it is that eats the fish.” So one day Badang 
concealed himself among the reedsf 82 and watched, and he saw 
a demon come and eat the fish in the trap; a demon with eyes 
as red as flame, with creel-like matted hair and a beard down to 
his waist. Badang seized his cleaver and mustering up his courage 
he set upon the demon and caught him by the beard, saying, 
"It's you who are always eating my fish! This time you shall die 
by my hand!” When the demon heard the words of Badang, 
he was utterly confused! 83 and terrified and vainly sought to 
escape from Badang's grasp. "Kill met 84 not”, he cried, "and 
I will give you whatever you desire, be it riches, be it strength 
and endurance, be it invisibility—you shall have it if you spare my 
life.” And Badang reflected, "If I ask for riches, it is my master 
who will get them. If I ask for invisibility, assuredly I shall be 
killed. That being so, I had better ask for power and strength 
in order that I may have strength for my master's work.” So 
he answered, "Give me power and strength so that any tree 
however big I can uproot and break; so that trees which are so 
thick that a man's arms can barely compass them, or are even 
twice as thick as that, I may be able to uproot with one hand!” 
And the demon answered, "Very well, if you desire strength, I 
will give it to you, but you must first eat my vomit.” "Very 
well”, said Badang, "vomit then, that I may eat your vomit.” 
And the demon vomited, copiously. Badang ate the vomit, every 


1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



36 


The Malay Annals 

[ 66 — 67 ] bit of it, but all the time he heldf 85 the demon's beard and would 
not let it go. After he had eaten the demon's vomit, Badang 
made trial of his strength and he uprooted one big tree after 
another, breaking them all. Then he let go the demon's beard 
and made his way to the land he was clearing for his master, 
where he uprooted and broke one big tree after another, and 
trees so thick that a man's arms could barely compass them, or 
even twice as thick as that, he plucked from the ground with 
but onef 80 hand, so that they were completely torn up roots and 
all, while smaller trees he twitched up with but one hand and 
sent flying. Thus it was that in the twinkling of an eye a great 
forest became nothing but a treeless plain, of immeasurable 
extent. 

And when his master saw what had been done, he said, 
"Who felledf 87 this land of ours that it has been cleared with 
such speed?" And Badang answered, "Your servant felled it." 
And his master asked, "In what manner did you fell it that 
the work has been done with such speed and land cleared as far 
as the eye can see?" And Badang told the whole story to his 
master, who thereupon freed him. 

When Sri Rana Wikerma came to hear of this, he sent for 
Badang and madef 88 him one of his war-chiefs: and it was Badang 
who was ordered to pass a chain across the river to serve as a 
boom and restrict the passage of ships in and out of Singapura. 
And for the Raja's table, Badang was sent to fetch kuras* from 
Kuala Sayong for salad. He went by himself, his boat was 
eight fathoms long and for his punt-pole he used a whole kempast 
trunk. When he reached Kuala Sayong, he climbed the kuras 
tree but the bough which was supporting his weight broke and he 
fell to the ground, crashing his head on a rock. And the rock was 
split, though Badang's head was not: and that rock is at Kuala 
Sayong to this day, as are Badang's punt-pole and boat. 

Badang returned from Kuala Sayong the same day and he 
filled his boat with bananas and keladi§, all of which he had eaten 
by the time he had gone down the river as far as Johor. Once 
upon a time Sri Rama (? Rana) Wikerma had a boat twelve 
fathoms long built for him in front of the palace. When the 
boat was finished and was to be launched, it was found that two 
or three hundred men between them could not launch it. So 
Badang was ordered to launch it, and he by himself launched 
it so vigorously that it shot across to the other side of the river. 

* Dryobalanops Oblongifolia. 

$ Coompassia malaeensis. 

$ Colocasia antiquorum. 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 




translated by C. C. Brown 37 

f67—68] Laterf 89 the news reached Kalinga that the Raja of Singapura 

had a war-chief possessed of prodigious strength. Now the Raja 
of Kalinga had among his champions an enormously powerful 
man, and the Raja of Kalinga commanded that this man should 
go to Singapura with seven ships. And the Raja said to him, 
'‘Go you to Singapura and pit yourself in a trial of strength 
against the war-chief of Singapura. If he defeats you, you will 
pay to him as the stakesf 90 of the match the contents of these 
seven ships. But if you defeat him, you will demand the value 
of the goods in the seven ships.” And the champion answered, 
"Very well, your Highness”, and he then set sail for Singapura 
with the seven ships. When he reached Singapura, word was 
brought to Sri Rana Wikerma that a champion was come from 
Kalinga for a trial of strength with Badang, the stakes of the 
match to be, if he was beaten, the contents of the seven ships 
(he had with him). King Sri Rana Wikerma thereupon appeared 
from the palace and gave an audience, at which the Kalinga 
champion presented himself. The Raja bade him contend with 
Badang, but in every encounter between them the Kalinga cham¬ 
pion was worsted by Badang. Now in front of the hall of 
audience there was a huge rock, and the Kalinga champion said 
to Badang, "Let us try our strength in lifting that rock. Which¬ 
ever of us fails to lift it is the loser.” "Very well”, answered 
Badang, "you try first.” Thereupon the Kalinga champion tried 
to lift the rock but failed. He then put forth every effort 
and raised it as far as his knees, then he let it down again with 
a crash, saying, "Now it's your turn, sir.” "Very well”, said 
Badang and he lifted the rock, swung it into the air and hurled 
it to the far bank of Kuala Singapura. That is the rock which 
is there to this day on the extremity of Tanjong Singapura. The 
Kalinga champion then handed over to Badang all seven ships 
with their contents and departed for his own country grieving 
under the disgrace of the defeat that Badang had inflicted upon 
him. 


The news then reached Perlak that the Raja of Singapura 
had a war-chief of enormous strength, Badang by name, whose 
equal did not exist at that time. Now according to the account 
we have received the Raja of Perlak also had a champion, named 
Benderang, who was famed for his great strength. At the time 
that news was brought about Badang it happened that Benderang 
was in the presence of the Raja of Perlak: and he said to the 
Raja of Perlak, "Your Highness, it is hardly likely that this Badang 
is stronger than I. If your Highness will so command, let me 
go to Singapura for a contest with him!” And the Raja of 
Perlak agreed; and turning to his chief minister he said, "I desire 
you go to Singapura as I am sendingf 91 Benderang there.” "Very 
well, your Highness,” answered Tun Perpateh Pandak; and after 
•doing obeisance he left the palace and summoned men for the 

2952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



38 


The Malay Annals 


[68 — 69] work of making ready a ship. When the ship was ready [it was 
Tun Perpateh Pan dak who was commanded by the Raja of Perlak 
to go to Singapura with Benderang], the letter was borne in pro¬ 
cession to the ship and Tun Perpateh Pandak sailed for Singapura, 
which he reached in the course of a few days. On his arrival there 
word was brought to the Raja of Singapura, "Your Highness, Tun 
Perpateh Pandak, chief minister of the Raja of Perlak, is come 
bringing one Benderang, who is one of the Raja of Perlak's cham¬ 
pions and has been sent hither for a trial of strength with Badang.' r 
When King Sri Rana Wikerma heard this he appeared and gave 
an audience at which princes, ministers, courtiers, heralds and 
pagesf 92 were all in attendance. And Sri Rana Wikerma com¬ 
manded Maha Indra Bopal to fetchf 93 the letter with due cere¬ 
mony from the ship, taking elephants! 94 for the purpose. And 
the letter was borne in procession into the palace domain. It 
was then read, and its wording! 95 gave great pleasure. Tun Per¬ 
pateh Pandak then did obeisance, and the king ordered that he 
should sit on the same level as Tun Jana Buga Den dang, while 
Benderang was given a place on the same level as Badang. Then 
the king asked Tun Perpateh Pandak, "On what business has 
our brother sent you hither, sir?" And Tun Perpateh Pandak 
answered, "I have been commanded by your Highness' younger 
brother to bring hither Benderang for a trial of strength with! 9 * 
Badang. If Benderang loses, the contents of a warehouse are 

E resented to your Highness by your Highness' younger brother. 

E Badang loses, your Highness would pay a similar forfeit."* 
"Very well," said Sri Rana Wikerma, "to-morrow we will pit 
them against each other." After a short conversation the king 
left the audience hall and went into the palace, whereupon all 
who had presented themselves before him returned, each to his 
house. 

King Sri Rana Wikerma then sent for Badang: and when he 
appeared, the king said to him, "To-morrow I am matching you 
against Benderang". And Badang replied, "Your Highness, this 
Benderang is an outstanding champion of these times, a man of 
such exceptional strength that he is famed far and wide. If l 
am beaten, will not your Highness be put to shame? I humbly 
suggest that if your Majesty wishes to match me against him, he 
should be summoned to-night and given food, so that I may 
see how he acquits! 97 himself. If I can contend with him, I 
will do so. If I cannot, then I hope your Highness will forbid 
the match and prohibit my contending with him." The king 
agreed and that night he sent for Tun Perpateh Pandak, Bende¬ 
rang and their companions. When they were came, they were* 
entertained; meat and drink were set before them and they made* 
merry. Now Benderang sat side by side with Badang, and Badang 
squeezed close up to him; whereupon Benderang laid his thigh 
over that of Badang and pressed it down with all his might.. 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



39 


translated by C. C. Brown 

169—70] Badang however raised his thigh and forced up Benderang’s. Then 
Badang laid his thigh over that of Benderang; and try as he 
might Benderang could not raise his thigh. What happened] 98 
thus between Badang and Benderang was seen by no one else: 
they alone knew. After a night’s] 99 feasting the envoys were drunk 
and the whole party took their leave and returned to the ship. 

When they had gone, King Sri Rana Wikerma asked Badang, 
“Do you feel yourself a match for Benderang?” And Badang 
answered, “Yes, your Highness, with your royal sanctity to help 
me I shall be a match for him. To-morrow let your Highness 
pit me against him.” And the king replied, “Very well then”, 
and he then retired, whereupon all those present returned, each 
to his house. And when Tun Perpateh Pandak reached his ship, 
Benderang said to him, “If you can so contrive it, sir, let me not 
be pitted against Badang, in case he should prove to be more 
than a match for me, for I find him to be possessed of prodigious 
strength.” And Tun Perpateh Pandak answered, “Very well, I 
can contrive that without difficulty.” Day then dawned. 

Early in the morning King Sri Rana Wikerma appeared from 
the palace and gave an audience, and when Tun Perpateh Pandak 
presented himself, the king said to him, “Now we will pit Bende- 
rang against Badang.” But Tun Perpateh Pandak answered, “It 
would be better not, your Highness: the defeat of either might 
mean pitting] 100 your Highness against your Highness’ younger 
brother!” And King Sri Rana Wikerma smiled and said, “Very 
well, Tun Perpateh Pandak, I won’t oppose your wishes!” 

Tun Perpateh Pandak then sought leave to return to Perlak, 
and King Sri Rana Wikerma gave him a letter and a present to 
take to the Raja of Perlak, whereupon he sailed home to Perlak. 
According to one tradition it was Benderang who made the 
Boom] 101 across the river which still exists at Singapura. And 
when Tun Perpateh Pandak reached Perlak, the letter he brought 
was by the Raja of Perlak (’s orders?)] 102 borne in procession by 
elephant] 103 , the elephant being brought alongside the hall of 
audience. And the king (? gave orders to) read the letter and 
was well pleased with its wording. And he asked Tun Perpateh 
Pandak why it was that the match between Benderang and Badang 
had not taken place. Tun Perpateh Pandak then described what 
happened between Badang and Benderang when they were drink¬ 
ing, and the Raja of Perlak received the story in silence. And 
after a while Badang died and was buried at Buru. When the 
news of his death reached Kalinga, the Raja of Kalinga sent a 
stone for the grave, and that is the stone which is there to this 
day. And after King Sri Rana Wikerma had reigned for thirteen 
years he died and was succeeded on the throne by his son Dam 
Raja, with the title of Paduka Sri Maharaja. Now the consort of 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



40 


The Malay Annals 

[70] King Dam was with child: and when the time was accomplished,, 
she brought forth a son. At his birth the midwife pressed too 
heavily on his head, with the result that it became lower in the 
middle than on either side: and the king gave the child the 
name Raja Iskandar the Two-horned. 

God knoweth the truth. To Him do we return. 

Chapter VI 

The story of the Rajas of Pasai. Merah Silu is driven out 
by his brother and goes to the country to which he gives the 
name of Semudra, the Semudra of which the Prophet foretold 
the conversion to Islam. The voyage of the missionaries 
from Mecca to Semudra in Nakhoda Isma’il’s ship and the suc¬ 
cessive conversions of Fansuri, Lamiri, Haru and Perlak on their 
way. They reach Semudra where Merah Silu is converted to 
Islam and made Raja of Semudra with the title of Sultan 
Maliku’l-Saleh. The marriage of Sultan Maliku’l-Saleh with, 
the daughter of the Raja of Perlak. He has two sons, Sultan 
Maliku’tl-Tahir and Sultan Maliku’l-Mansur. He founds Pasai 
as a settlement for Sultan Maliku’tl-Tahir and after dividing his 
men, elephants and regalia equally between his two sons makes 
Sultan Maliku’l-Mansur ruler of Semudra. The Raja of Shahru’n- 
nuwi (Siam) takes Sultan Maliku'tl-Tahir captive, but the letter 
is recovered from Siam by his faithful minister disguised as air 
Arab trader and is restored to sovereignty in Pasai. Sultan 
Maliku’l-Mansur offends his brother, is captured by him and 
exiled to Manjong; and though Sultan Maliku’tl-Tahir subse¬ 
quently repents of his treatment of his brother and sends to* 
Manjong to bring him back, Sultan Maliku’l-Mansur dies at 
Padang Maya by the tomb of his minister, whom Sultan Maliku’tl- 
Tahir had executed. The attack of the swordfish on Singapore* 
Sang Ranjuna Tapa’s treachery in revenge for Sultan Iskandar’* 
treatment of his daughter. The invasion of Singapore by the- 
Javanese and the fall of the city. Sultan Iskandar is drivenr 
from Singapore and finally makes a settlement at Malacca. 
After a reign of 25 years he dies and is succeeded by his son 
who takes the title of Sultan Megat. The latter only reigns 
for two years and is succeeded by his son. Raja Tengah, who 
is miraculously converted to Islam. Saiyid ‘Abdu’l-'Aziz comes 
from Jeddah, all Malacca is converted to Islam and Raja Tengalr 
takes the title of Sultan Muhammad Shah. He introduces precise* 
court ceremonial and proves himself to be a good and just ruler. 
The rise of Malacca to greatness. 

(Shellabear, chapters VII to XI) 

Here now is the story of the Raja (? Rajas) of Pasaif 103a ; and 
this is how it begins according to the account we have received* 
There were two brothers Merah, who lived near Pasangan. They 
came originally from Mount Sanggong; and the elder was called 
Merah Chaga, the younger Merah Silu. Now Merah Silu 
wentf 104 in tor setting fish-traps. If he caught galley-worms, he 
would throw them away. Then he would set his trap again, 
and again he caught galley-worms. After this had been going: 
on for some time, he decided one day to boilf 105 the galley-worms. 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



41 


translated by C. C. Brown 

|70—71] when lo! and behold, they turned into gold and their spume 
into silver! Yet again did Merah Silu set his trap, and again he 
caught galley-worms, which he boiled and they turned into gold as 
before. And when Merah Silu had gained much gold in this 
way, a report reached Merah Chaga that "your brother eats 
galley-worms.” And Merah Chaga was so angry with his brother 
that he was minded to killf 100 him. When Merah Silu heard of 
this, he fled to the forest of Jerun. Now the place where Merah 
Silu caught the galley-worms is known as the Field of Galley-worms 
to this day. 

We come now to the story of Merah Silu living in the forest 
of Jerun. He gave goldf 107 to the people of the forest so that 
they did whatever he told them to do. One day Merah Silu was 
out hunting and his hound, which he called "Pasai”, gave tongue. 
And Merah Silu saw that "Pasai” was barking on some high 
ground which looked as though it had been heaped up. So ne 
climbed up on to the high ground and there he beheld an ant 
that was as big as a cat. Merah Silu caught the ant and ate it; 
and of the high ground he made a dwelling-place,, calling it 
Semudraf 107a which signifies 'great ant/ 

Now history relates that in the days of the Apostle of God 
(may God bless him and give him peace), the Apostle said to 
his Companions, "In the latter days there shall be a city, below 
the wind, called Semudra. When you hear tell of this Semudra 
go thither with all speed and bring the people of that city into 
the Faith of Islam, for in that city shall be born many saints of 
God. There shall be moreover a fakir of a city named Ma’abri. 
Him take with you.” Some time after this saying of the Prophet 
(may God bless him and give him peace), the people of Mecca 
came to hear of the name of Semudra, and the Ruler of Mecca 
sent a ship there with regalia on board and ordered that the ship 
should call at Ma’abri on the way. The master of the ship was 
one Shaikh Isma’il. 

And the ship set sail; and ere long put in at Ma’abri, anchor¬ 
ing in the roads. Now the Raja in that city was called Sultan 
Muhammad; and he ordered men to ask, "Whence is this ship?” 
And the answer came back from the ship, "We are come from 
Mecca and are on our way to Semudra.” Now this Sultan 
Muhammad was descended from Abubakar the Most Truthful 
(may God be content with him). And the men in the ship said, 
“Our coming is by reason of the behest of the Apostle of God 
(may God bless him and and give him peace)”. When Sultan 
Muhammad heard this, he made his eldest son Raja of Ma’abri 
in his stead and he himself with his younger son donned the dress 
of a fakir. Then abdicating the throne, he left the palace and 
went on board the ship, saying to the men, "Take me to Semu- 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society . 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



42 


The Malay Annals 

[71—72] dra.” And they thought to themselves, "This mustf 107b be the 
fakir who was spoken of by the Prophet of God (may God bless 
him and give him peace)!” And they took him on board the 
ship and set sail. After they had been some while at sea they 
came to a country called Fansurif 107c , and all the people of Fansuri 
embraced Islam. The following day the fakir went ashore with 
a Koran and he told the people of Fansuri to read it but not 
one of them could do so. And the fakir said to himself, "This 
is not the country spoken of by our Prophet, Muhammad the 
Apostle of God (may God bless him and give him peace). 

So Nakhoda Isma’il sailed on until after a time they came 
to a country called Lamirif 107d . And the people of Lamiri embraced 
Islam. And the fakir went ashore taking with him a Koran, 
which he told the people of Lamiri to read, but not one of them 
could read it. The fakir then went back on board the ship 
and the voyage was resumed, until after a time they came tof 107e 
Haru, where all the inhabitants embraced Islam. And the fakir 
went aboard the ship and returned with a Koran, which he told the 
people to read but not one of them could read it. And the fakir 
asked the people, "Wheref 107f is the country called Semudra?" 
And they answered, 'Tou have sailed past it. So he went back 
on board the ship, and they sailed on again until they made a 
.land-fall at Perlakf 107g , where the fakir admitted the people to the 
Faith of Islam. The ship then sailed on to Semudra. 

And when they reached Semudra the fakir went ashore 
where he met Merah Silu hunting for shell-fish on the beach. 
And the fakir asked him, "What is the name of this country? 7 ' 
And Merah Silu answered, "This is Semudra." And the fakir 
asked. "What is the name of the headman of this country?' r 
And Merah Silu replied, "It is I who am the headman of the 
people here." The fakir thereupon admitted him to the Faith 
of Islam and taught him the Muslim creed. And when Merah 
Silu had become a Muhammadan he returned to his house and 
the fakir returned to his ship. And that night in his sleep Merah 
Silu dreamt that the Apostle of God (may God bless him and 
give him peace) appeared to him, and the Apostle of God said 
to him, "Open your mouth, Merah Silu." And Merah Silu 
^opened his mouth and the Prophet (may God bless him and 
give him peace) spat into the mouth of Merah Silu. And Merah 
Silu was awakened from his sleep and to his nostrils there came 
from his body a fragrance as of spikenard. The next morning 
the fakir came ashore bringing with him a Koran and he told 
Merah Silu to read it. And Merah Silu read the Koran. Then 
said the fakir to Shaikh Isma’il, the master of the ship, "This is 
the country of Semudra of which the Prophet (may God bless 
him and give him peace) spoke." Shaikh Isma'il then took ashore 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



43 


translated by C. C. Brown 

from his ship the regalia he had brought with him and he in¬ 
stalled Merah Silu as Raja with the title of Sultan MalikuVSaleh. 

The chiefs in that country were two in number, one called 
Sri Kaya and the other called Bawa Kaya. Both of them em¬ 
braced Islam, Sri Kaya taking the name of Saidi *Ali Ghithayu’d- 
din and Bawa Kaya the name of Saidi Asmayu'd-din. Shaikh 
Ismail then sailed for Mecca, leaving the fakir behind to confirm 
the people in the Faith. Thereupon Sultan MalikuVSaleh sent 
Saidi ‘Ali Ghithayu’d-din to Perlak to ask for the hand of the Raja 
of Perlak’s daughter. Now the Raja of Perlak had three daugh¬ 
ters, two of them by his royal wife and one, called Princess 
Genggang, by a secondary wife. When Saidi ‘Ali Ghithayu’d-din 
reached Perlak, the Raja of Perlak showed all three of his daugh¬ 
ters to him; but he made the two sisters by the same mother sit 
below Princess Genggang, whom he ordered to sit above them on 
a raised seat and stripf 108 betel-nuts for her sisters. She wore a 
rose-coloured sarong, a jacket the colour of the jamb u* flower, and 
earstuds shaped like the flower of the Palmyra oil-palm; she had 
in her hand a jengkelenar flower and she was very beautiful. 
And Saidi ‘Ali Ghithayu’d-din said f 109 to the Raja of Perlak/' 
It is the daughter of your Highness sitting in the upper seat 
that my master asks for/ 7 But he knew not that Princess Geng¬ 
gang was only the daughter of a secondary wife. And the Raja 
of Perlak laughed merrily and said, "Very well, it shall be as he 
pleases." 

The Raja of Perlak then ordered a fleet of a hundred sail to 
be made ready, and Tun Perpateh Pandak was ordered to escort 
Princess Genggang to Semudra. And when they reached Semu¬ 
dra Sultan MalikuVSaleh went out to greet Princess Genggang 
at Jambu Ayer, whence he escorted her into Semudra with every 
mark of honour and distinction. And when they reached Semu¬ 
dra, the king initiated the customary ceremonies of many days 
and many nights. And when they were ended the marriage of 
the king with Princess Genggang took place. After the wedding 
the king gave of his bounty to his ministers and war-chiefs and 
distributed alms to all the poor and needy of Semudra, giving 
them gold and silver. (He) also (gave rich presents)t 110 to Tun 
Perpateh Pandak who some time after the wedding had taken 
place sought leave to depart and returned to Perlak. And in the 
course of time Sultan MalikuVSaleh had two children by Prin¬ 
cess Genggang, both of them sons; the elder was given the name 
of Sultan Maliku tl-Tahir and the younger the name of Sultan 
MalikuTMansur. The elder son was put in the charge of Saidi 
'Ali Ghithayu’d-din and the younger in the charge of Saidi ‘Ali 
Asmayu’d-Din. _ 

"*. Eugenia sp. 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 




44 


The Malay Annals 

[73—75] Now when Sultan Maliku'tl-Tahir and Sultan Maliku’l 

Mansur had grown upf 111 , Perlak was defeated in war by an 
enemy from across the water, and the people of Perlak betook 
themselves to Semudra. And Sultan Maliku's-Saleh conceived the 
idea of building a city for his sons, and he said to his chiefs, 
"Tomorrow let us go hunting/' At day-break he mounted his 
elephant called Perma Dewana and crossed the river. When he 
reached the far shore, the hound called "Pasai” gave tongue. 
Sultan Maliku's-Saleh hastened to the hound and found that it 
was barking on some high ground which in extent was large 
enough for a palace and its outbuildings. It was a fine site and 
looked as though it had been banked up by hand. This high 
ground Sultan Maliku's-Saleh ordered to be cleared, and on it 
he had a city built and a palace withal. And he called the place 
Pasai after his hound. And he made his son Sultan Maliku'tl- 
Tahir Raja of Pasai, with Saidi ‘Ali Ghithayu'd-Din as chief 
minister. And Sultan Maliku'l-Saleh divided his men, his 
elephants and horses, and the regalia giving half to his son Sultan 
Maliku'tl-Tahir and half to his son Sultan Maliku'l-Mansur. 

And after a while Sultan Maliku's-Saleh fell sick, and he 
sent for the chiefs of Semudra and summoned his two sons. 
And when they were all come together—the officers of state, 
his two sons and the chiefs—he spoke thus to his sons and the 
chiefs, "My sons, my friends and officers, my appointed time 
when I shall die is near at hand; and I bid you when I am gone 
see to it that you, .my sons, hanker not after the goods of 
others nor lust after the wives of those who serve you. And 
you, my sons, live in concord one with another and let there 
be no variance between you.” Then turning to Saidi ‘Ali Glii- 
thayu'd-Din and Saidi Asmayu'd-Din he said, "Do you, my 
brothers, take good care of these my two sons and prevent! 112 any 
variance between them. Never fail in your loyalty to them or 
do homage to any other Raja but these my two sons.” And the- 
two of them knelt before the king and wept, and they said, "Your 
Highness, light of our eyes, by God Almighty the Creator of the 
Universe never will we, your humble servants, go back on our 
word or waver in our loyalty so as to do homage to any Raja 
but these two sons of your Highness.” 

Sultan Maliku’s-Saleh then made his son Sultan Maliku'l- 
Mansur Raja of Semudra. And three days later he died and 
was buried close to his palace. He is known to this day as ‘He 
who found God's Mercy in Semudra.' 

After the death of his father Sultan Maliku'tl-Tahir and 
Sultan Maliku'l-Mansur (sic: ? omit) gave orders for the assem¬ 
bling of his war-chiefs, troops, elephants and horses, together with 
the regalia of Pasai. And Pasai grew greater from day to day and 
very many were its inhabitants. 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



45 


translated by C. C. Brown 

[ 75 — 76 ] Here now is. a story of the Raja of Shahru'n-nuwi, who ruled 

a very great kingdom: his war-chiefs were legion and his men so 
numerous that none could count them. When people told the 
Raja of Shahru'n-nuwi about Semudra, of the number of its 
inhabitants, how many were the foreigners and merchants in the 
city and how great was the kingdom of the Raja, the Raja of 
Shahru'n-nuwi said to his war-chiefs, “Which of you will capture 
the Raja of Semudraf 113 for me?" And one of them, Awi Dichu, 
a war-chief of great strength and courage, answered, “Your High¬ 
ness, if by your Highness' favour I am given four thousand men, 

I will capture the Raja of Semudra and bring him alive to your 
Highness." The Raja of Shahru'n-nuwi then took four thousand 
war-chiefs and handed them over, with a hundred craft, to his 
war-chief Awi Dichu, whof 113a proceeds to fit out (?) the 
hundred ships. And when the ships had been made ready for 
sea, Awi Dichu ordered them to sail for Semudra in the guise of 
traders; and they set out one after the other untilf 114 the whole 
fleet had sailed. Then Awi Dichu himself sailed, making himself 
out to be an envoy from the Raja of Shahru'n-nuwi. And when 
word reached Semudra that envoys from the Raja of Shahru'n- 
nuwi were arriving, the Raja of Semudra ordered his war-chiefs 
to welcome them. 

When Awi Dichu reached the shore, the letter he brought 
was takenf 115 ; and he then hid in chests four strong war-chiefs 
of his, saying to them, “When you come into the presence of the 
Raja of Semudra, open these chests, come out, all four of you, 
and capture the Raja of Semudra." Thp chests were then locked 
from within and were borne in procession, being described as 
the present accompanying the letter from the Raja of Shahru'n- 
nuwi. When the letter had been brought before the Raja of 
Semudra, it was read, and it was to such and such an effect. 
Then the chests were laid out before the Raja of Semudra, where¬ 
upon the Shahru'n-nuwi war-chiefs inside them each opened the 
chest he was in, came out and seized the Raja of Semudra. The 
war-chiefs of the Raja of Semudra forthwith raised an outcry and 
drawing each man his weapon, were for fighting the war-chiefs 
of Shahru'n-nuwi, who however cried, “Lay a hand on us and 
we'll kill your Raja, make no doubt of that!" As thev could not 
now fight the Shahru'n-nuwi war-chiefs, the men of Pasai accord¬ 
ingly stayed still. Awi Dichu and his men then returned! 116 
to their ships taking the Raja of Pasai with them and sailed off 
home with him. 

And when they were come to Shahru'n-nuwi, Awi Dichu 
brought the Raja of Pasai (sic) to the Raja of Shahru'n-nuwi who 
was well pleased and gave to Awi Dichu and the war-chiefs who 
had accompanied him robes of honour suchf 117 as princes wear. 
As for the Raja of Semudra he ordered him to tend the palace 
fowls. 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



46 


The Malay Annals 

[76—77] Ta. retjjrn now to Saidi 'Ali Ghithayn’d-din. After consult¬ 

ing with the elder ministers of Pasai he had a ship built and he 
boughtf 118 Arabian merchandise: and since at that time all the 
people of Pasai knew Arabic, Saidi 'Ali Ghithayu’d-din and the 
crew of the ship dressed themselves like Arabs. He then went 
aboard the ship and when all her equipment was ready he he sailed 
for Shahru’n-nuwi. And when in due course they came to 
Shahru’n-nuwi, Saidi 'Ali Ghithayu’d-din went ashore and pre¬ 
sented himself before the Raja, taking with him as a gift to the 
king a tree (that he had) made of gold, its fruit being precious 
stones of various kinds, to the valuef 119 of about a bhara* of 
gold. When the Raja of Shahru’n-nuwi beheld the present, he 
asked, “What isf 120 it that you desire of me?” And Saidi 'Ali 
Ghithayu’d-din and his companions answered, “We desire 
nothing! 321 .” And the king was astonished at the present and 
thought to himself, “What canf 122 it be that these men want of 
me that they should give me such a present?” And the men of 
Pasai returned to their ship. 

A day or two later the master of the ship again came ashore 
(with his companions?) and they presented themselves before 
the Raja of Shahru’n-nuwi taking with them as a present a 
golden chess-board with jewelled chess-men, to the valuef 123 , as 
in the former case, of a bhara of gold. And the Raja of Shahru’n- 
nuwi said, “Whatf 124 is it that you desire of me, that I may 
give it to you?” And they replied, “We desire nothing,” and 
returned to their ship. After a few days the season came for 
the return voyage and Saidi 'Ali Ghithayu’d-din began to set 
the ship’s gear in order for the voyage. He and his companions 
then presented themselves before the Raja of Shahru’n-nuwi, 
taking with them as gifts a pair of ducks, male and female, made 
of gold and studded with jewels, to the value of about a bhara 
of gold, together with a deep bowl made of gold and filled 
with water. The two ducks were then released into the golden 
bowl, where they swam, dived and chased one another. And 
the Raja of Shahru’n-nuwi was amazed at the sight of these magic 
ducks, and he said, “Now tell me the truth, what is it that you 
want? By the God whom I worship I will refuse you nothing 
that you desire.” 

Thereupon Saidi 'Ali Ghithayu’d-din answered, “If your 
Highness will graciously grant us this boon, we crave from your 
Highness the man who tendsf 125 your fowls.” And the Raja of 
Shahru’n-nuwi said, “He is the Raja of Pasai; as you have asked 
for him, I will give him to you.” And they replied, “It is because 
he is a Muslim that we crave him from your Highness.” And the 
Raja of Shahru’n-nuwi granted Sultan Maliku’l-Tahir to Saidi 
*Ali Ghithayu’d-din, who took him to the ship. And when they 

*? 400 lbs. See note. 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 




47 


translated by C. C. Brown 

I 77 7 ®] had gone aboard, they lustrated him and arrayed him as a Raja. 

And a breeze sprang up, the anchor was weighed and the ship 
sailed for Semudra, where they arrived after a voyage of some days. 

To return now to Raja Maliku’l-Mansur at Semudra. One 
day he said to Saidi Asmayu’d-din, “I should like to visit my elder 
brother and see how he fares/' And Saidi Asmayu’d-din answered, 
"I pray your Highness, go not. There may be troublef 126 .” In 
vain however did Saidi Asmayu’d-din try to dissuade Sultan 
Maliku’l-Mansur, the king turned a deaf ear. So Saidi Asmayu’d- 
din said no more and ordered a proclamation to be made, thus 
"Be it known that Sultan Maliku’l-Mansur proposes to proceed 
on a visit to the city of his brother.” But Saidi Asmayu’d-din 
did not approve, for he was an old minister and of wide expe¬ 
rience and he realised that trouble was inevitable. Sultan Maliku’l- 
Mansur however persisted and he proceeded on a tour of Pasai 
until finally he entered the palace of Sultan Maliku’l-Tahir. Con¬ 
ceiving a passion for one of the women attendants he carried 
her off and brought her back to his palace. Then he said to 
Saidi Asmayu’d-din, "Alas, my friend, something that was too 
difficult for me has come upon me. Conquered by my fleshly 
lusts my discretion vanished. What I have done has been my 
ruin, my fleshly lusts were too strong for me.” And Saidi 
Asmayu’d-din answered, "God’s holy will for his creatures hast 127 
been done.” Then there came news f 128 of Sultan Maliku’tl- 
Tahir who was reported to be at Jambu Ayer, and news of (the 
wrong) Sultan Maliku’l-Mansur (had done) reached Sultan 
Maliku’l-Tahir, who thereupon harboured malice against his 
brother though he disclosed it to no one. And Sultan Maliku’l- 
Tahir sent a message to Sultan Maliku’l-Mansur asking him to 
welcomef 129 him (?). Sultan Maliku’l-Mansur accordingly left 
Semudra and went down to the mouth of the river. Meanwhile 
Sultan Maliku’l-Tahir landed from the Ketui river and went 
overland to his palace. Sultan Maliku’l-Mansur then returned 
to Semudra, reflecting on what he had done and what had hap¬ 
pened in consequence of his refusal to follow the advice of 
Saidi Asmayu’d-din, though repentance was now of no avail. But 
the heart of Sultan Maliku’l-Tahir had been moved against Sultan 
Maliku’l-Mansur. 

Sultan Maliku’l-Tahir had a son named Sultan Ahmad who 
at the time of Sultan Maliku’l-Tahir’s captivity was still a child 
but had grown up by the time his father came back from Shah- 
ru’n-nuwi. Now Saidi *Ali Ghithayu’d-din had retired and was 
succeeded as chief minister by Tun Perpateh Tulus Tukang 
Sekarai, his son-in-law. One day Sultan Maliku’l-Tahir said to 
Perpateh Tulus Tukang Sekarai, "What think you should be done 
in the matter of (the conduct of?) Sultan Maliku’l-Mansur?” And 
Perpateh Tulus Tukang Sekarai answered, "There is a plan for 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society . 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



48 The Malay Annals 

[7S—79] us ” And Sultan Maliku’l-Tahir said, "What if Sultan Maliku’l- 
Mansur should die?” And Tun Perpateh Tulus Tukang Sekarai 
replied, "If Sultan Maliku’l-Mansur dies, then If 130 am no tukang*! 
Let us have your Highness' son Sultan Ahmad circumcised and 
invite. Sultan Maliku’l-Mansur to the ceremony. That will be 
the moment to putf 130a our plan into effect.” 

So Sultan Maliku’l-Tahir gave orders for the city and the 
hall of audience to be decorated, and he initiated the day and 
night festivities for the ceremony. And Sultan Maliku’l-Mansur 
arrived, whereupon Sultan Maliku’l-Tahir gave orders for him and 
Saidi Asmayu’d-din to be admitted to the palace, his war-chiefs 
however tot 131 remain outside. He then ordered the arrest of 
Sultan Maliku’l-Mansur and Saidi Asmayu’d-din, and he ordered 
one of his war-chiefs to take Sultan Maliku’l-Mansur to 
Manjongf 132 . The king then said to Saidi Asmayu’d-din, "Stay 
here and go not with Sultan Maliku’l-Mansur. Attempt to go 
with him and I’ll have your head cut off!” To which Saidi 
Asmayu’d-din replied, "Better the head should part company with 
the body than a servant part company with his master!” Sultan 
Maliku’l-Tahir then ordered Saidi Asmayu’d-din to be beheaded, 
his head to be cast into the sea and his body to be impaled at 
Kuala Pasai. 

Now Sultan Maliku’l-Mansur was taken by ship towards the 
east, and when they had come in the direction of Jambu Ayer 
heading eastward the shipmaster beheld a human head fouling 
the rudder. Sultan Maliku’l-Mansur was informed and he ordered 
the head to be recovered. And he saw that it was the head of 
Saidi Asmayu’d-din. And the king looked towards the land and 
asked, "Whatf 133 plain is this?” And to this day the place is 
known as Padang Maya (what plain). Then Sultan Maliku’l- 
Mansur went ashore on thisf 134 plain and he sent a messenger 
to crave from Sultan Maliku’l-Tahir the corpse of Saidi Asmayu’d- 
din. And Sultan Maliku’l-Tahir gave the corpse to Sultan 
Maliku’l-Mansur who buried it at Padang Maya with the head 
and then went on to Manjong. After the departure of Sultan 
Maliku’l-Mansur, the ceremony of the circumcision of Sultan 
Ahmad was performed by his father. 

After Sultan Maliku’l-Mansur had been three years at Man¬ 
jong, one day Sultan Maliku’l-Tahir suddenly bethought him of 
his brother Sultan Maliku’l-Mansur, and he said, "To think what 
a foolf 135 I have been! Just because of a woman I have de¬ 
throned my brother and killed his minister!” And the king 
repented bitterly; and he ordered his war-chiefs to take a number 
of ships and bringf 136 his brother from Manjong. (This they did) 

* Craftsman. 


Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 




49 


translated by C. C. Brown 

[79—80] and Sultan MalikuTMansur was brought back in state. And 
when they came to Padang Maya, Sultan MalikuTMansur stopped 
there and went ashore to visit the grave of Saidi Asmayu a-ain. 
And the king greeted him, saying, "Peace be with you, old friend. 
Farewell to you here, for my brother has sent for me and I must 
go.” And Saidi Asmayu'd-din answered from the tomb, "Why, 
whither would your Majesty go? This is where we should be, 
you and I.” When Sultan MalikuTMansur heard these words, 
he took the water for prayers and said two prayers of greeting. 
And when he had prayed, he stretched himself upon the ground 
beside Saidi Asmayu'd-din's tomb. And the thread of his life 
snapped and he died. Word was brought to Sultan MalikuT 
Tahir of the death of his brother at Padang Maya beside the 
tomb of Saidi Asmayu’d-din. And forthwith the king set out 
to visit his brother; and when he was come to Padang Maya 
he buried the body of Sultan MalikuTMansur with all the solem¬ 
nity that is due to great Rajas. And he returned to Pasai sad 
at heart. Then he abdicated, after making Sultan Ahmad, his 
son, Raja in his stead. 

And after a while Sultan MalikuTTahir fell sick. And he 
gave his dying injunction to his son Sultan Ahmad, saying, "My 
son, light of my eyes and heart of my heart, disregard not the 
words of your servants in any matter of yours. Take counsel 
with your ministers and let not your heart be swift to anger. 
Be on your guard against aught that is dishonourable. Make not 
light of your duties to Almighty God, and lay not your hand 
wrongfully on the goods) of others.” And Sultan Ahmad wept at 
this the last injunction of his father. And after a few days 
Sultan MalikuTTahir died and was buried by his son near the 
mosque. And Sultan Ahmad came to the throne. 

Now there was a man of Pasai called Tun Jana Khatib. 
And he went to Singapura. And when he was come to Singapura, 
he walked through the streets accompanied by Tuan (?) di- 
Bungoran and Tuan di-Selangor. And it happened that as he 
was walking past the palace or the Raja of Singapura, the queen 
was looking out of the window and Tun Jana Khatib saw her. 
Now there was a betel-palm growing beside the palace, and Tun 
Jana Khatib cast a spell on it and it turned into two palms. And 
when Paduka Sri Maharaja saw what had happened he was very 
angry and said, "That's the sort of man Tun Jana Khatib is! 
No sooner does he know that the queen is looking at him than he 
shews off his powers!" And the king ordered him to be put to 
death. So Tun Jana Khatib was taken to the place of execution, 
near which was a man making cakes. And when Tun Jana Kha¬ 
tib was stabbed by the executioner, his blood dripped to the 
ground, though his body was spirited! 137 to Langkawi. And the 
cake-maker clapped the lid of his pan down over a clot of Tun 

J952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



50 


The Malay Annals 

[ 80 — 81 ] Jana Khatib's blood, which turned into stone and is there to this 
day. 


And after a while Singapura was attacked by swordfish, which 
leapt upon any one who was on the sea shore. If they attacked 
the victim in the chest, he was pierced through the chest and 
died: if they attacked the victim's neck, his head rolled off his 
shoulders and he died: and if they attacked the victim in the 
waist, he was pierced through the waist and died. So great was 
the number of those killed by the swordfish that there was a 
panic and people ran hither and thither crying, “The swordfish 
are come to attack us! They have killed thousands of our people!" 
And Paduka Sri Maharaja went forth on his elephant escorted 
by his ministersf 137a war-chiefs, courtiers and heralds. And when 
he reached the sea shore he was astounded to see the havoc the 
swordfish had wrought; how not a victim of their attack had 
escaped; how those who had been stabbed rolled f 137b over and over 
and died; and how the number of victims was ever mounting. 
And he ordered all his men to (stand side by side so as to) 
form a barricade of their shins, but the swordfish leapt upon 
them and any one they stabbed metf 138 his death. Like rain 
came the swordfish and the men they killed were past numbering. 

Presently a boy was heard to say, “What are we making this 
barricade of our legs for? Why are we deceiving ourselves? If 
w0 made a barricade of banana stems, would not that be better?" 
And when Paduka Sri Maharaja heard this he said, “That boy 
is right!", and he commanded his men to build a barricade of 
banana stems. And the swordfish came on; but as soon as they 
leapt, their snouts stuck on the banana stems, where they were 
cutf 139 down and killed in numbers past counting, and that was 
the end of the swordfish attack. 

Paduka Sri Maharaja then returned to the palace and his 
chiefs said to him, “Your Highness, that boy will grow into a 
very clever man. It would be as well to be rid of him!" And 
the king agreed and ordered the boy to be put to death. But 
when this boy was executed the guilt of his bloodf 140 was laid on 
Singapura. 

When Paduka Sri Maharaja had reigned f 141 for twelve years 
and six months he died and was succeeded on the throne by his 
son, Sri Sultan Iskandar Shah. He married a daughter 
of Tun Perpateh Tulus, and by her he had a son, Raja Kechil 
Besar as he was called. Now there was a certain Treasury officer 
of the king's who held the title of Sang Ranjuna Tapa and 
wasf 142 a Singapura man. He had a very beautiful daughter who 
was the king's mistress and a great favourite of his. But the 
rest of the king's womenfolk spoke ill of her and accused her of 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



51 


translated by C. C. Brown 

[81—82] misconduct. And Sultan Iskandar Shah was very angry and 
ordered her to be publicly exposed! 143 at onef 143a end of the 
market. But Sang Ranjuna Tapa felt himself deeply humiliated 
by this treatment of his daughter and said, "Even if my daughter 
is guilty of misconduct, let her merely be put to death, why 
humiliate her like this?” And he sent a letter to Java saying, 
"If the Batara of Majapahit wishes to attack Singapura, he should 
come forthwith as I am ready to give him assistance from within 
the city.” And when the Batara of Majapahit heard what was 
in the letter of the Treasury officer of the Raja of Singapura he 
forthwith ordered a fleet of three hundred ships to be made 
ready, together w\th_ countless galleys, commissariat craft and 
dug-outs, and a force of two hundred thousand! 144 Javanese fight¬ 
ing men. And the expedition set out! 145 ; and when it reached 
Singapura battle was engaged with the men of Singapura. After 
the battle had lasted for some days Sultan Iskandar Shah ordered 
the Treasury to issue rice for the provisioning of the troops, but 
Sang Ranjuna Tapa replied that there was no rice left; for he 
was going to turn traitor. And at dawn Sang Ranjuna Tapa 
opened the gate of the fort, whereupon the Javanese entered and 
fought with the men of Singapura inside the fort. So many 
were killed on either side that blood flowed like a river in spate 
and flooded the fort of Singapura on the sea shore, and that 
was the blood which exists to this day on the plain of Singapura. 
And the men ot Singapura were defeated, and Sultan Iskandar 
Shah fled, going by way of Saletar and thence to Muar. By the 
will of Almighty God the house of Sang Ranjuna Tapa and his 
wife was turned into rock, and that is the rock whicn exists to 
this day in the moat of Singapura. After the Javanese had con¬ 
quered Singapura they returned to Majapahit. 

And Sultan Iskandar Shah came to Muar. where he took up 
his abode at a certain place. As soon as night had fallen a vast 
horde of monitor-lizards came, and when day dawned the place 
was seen to be covered with them. People killed them and threw 
them into the sea, though they ate some. That night however 
the monitor-lizards came again in great masses and the following 
night they came again. And so great was the stench there that 
to this day the place in known as Biawak Busok. 

And Sultan Iskandar Shah moved from there and went on 
to another place. There he had a fort built, but by the night 
of the verv day on which it was built the fort had fallen into 
decay. Wherefore the place is known as Kota Burok to this 
day. And Sultan Iskandar moved on again up the coast until 
presently he struck inland and came after a few days to Sening 
Ujong. And perceiving that this was a good place he left a 
minister there—whichf 145a is why the place has a minister to this 
day—and from there he went straight! 145b back to the sea shore, 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



52 


The Malay Annals 

[82—83] to a river called Bertam. And as the king, who was hunting r 
stood under a tree, one of his hounds was kicked by a white 
mouse-deer. And Sultan Iskandar Shah said, “This is a good' 
place, when even its mouse-deer are full of fight! We shall do 
well to make a city here/' And the chiefs replied, “It is indeed 
as your Highness says.” Thereupon Sultan Iskandar Shah ordered 
that a city be made, and he asked, “What is the name of the tree 
under which I am standing?” And they all answered, “It is 
called Malaka, your Highness”; to which he rejoined, “Then 
Malaka shall be the name of this city.” 

And Sultan Iskandar Shah took up his abode at Malaka, 
where he established a system of court ceremonial. It was he 
who first instituted the appointment of four ministers who were 
to sit in the hall of audience and holdf 146 inquiries; and the 
appointment of heialdsf 147 who were to stand on the steps lead¬ 
ing up to the throne, forty on either side, and transmit any 
command given by the king; and the appointment of youths of 
good family as pages, their duty being to act as bearers of the 
Raja's personal requisitesf 148 . 

Now as for Sultan Iskandar Shah, when he had just com¬ 
pleted three years on the throne, Singapura fell to the lavanese 
and he went to Malaka, where he was established as Raja for 
twenty years. And after he had ruled in all for twenty-five years, 
then in the process of time he died and was succeeded on the 
throne by his son Raja Kechil Besar with the title of Sultan 
Megat. 

Now Tun Perpateh Tulus had died and his son became Ben- 
dahara. Sultan Megat married his daughter and by her had three 
sons, Radin Bagus, Radin Tengah and Radin Anum. And after 
he had reigned for two years Sultan Megat died and was suc¬ 
ceeded by his son Raja Tengah, who had married a daughter of 
Tun Perpateh Muka Berjajar and by her had a son named Raja 
Kechil Bambang. After Raja Tengah had been some while on 
the throne, he shewed in the treatment of his subjects such 
justice that no other Raja of his time in this world could equal 
him. 


One night the king had a dream, He dreamt that he saw 
clearly our Prophet Muhammad (God's Chosen, may God bless 
him and give him peace): and the Apostle of God (may God 
bless him and give him peace) said to Raja Tengah, “Say 'I testify 
that there is no god but God and that Muhammad is the Apostle 
of God'.” And Raja Tengah repeated word for word what the 
Apostle of God (may God bless him and give him peace) had 
told him: whereupon the Apostle of God (may God bless him 
and give him peace) said to him, “Your name is Muhammad. 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



translated by C. C. Brown 55 

[83—84] To-morrow, when it is the time for the afternoon prayer, there 
will come hither a ship from Juddah; and from that ship a man 
will land on this shore of Malaka. See to it that you do what¬ 
soever he tells you.” And Raja Tengah answered “Very well”, 
whereupon the Prophet of God (may God bless him and give him 
peace) disappeared from his sight. 

Thenf 149 day broke and Raja Tengah awoke from sleep; and 
he saw that he had been circumcised. And he kept continually 
repeating, “I testify that there is no god but God and that 
Muhammad is the Apostle of God,” to the astonishment of all 
the women-attendants of the palace. And the king's ministers 
said, “Is this Raja of ours possessed! 150 by the devil or isf 151 he 
mad? We had better inform the Bendaharaf 152 straightaway.” 
So the women-attendants went and informed the Bendahara. 
And the Bendahara came; and he went into the royal apartments 
where he found the Raja still repeating continually, “I testify 
that there is no god but God and that Muhammad is the 
Apostle of God. 

And the Bendahara said, “What language is this that you 
are talking, Siref 153 ?” And the Raja answered. “Last night I had 
a dream and in that dream I clearly saw the Lord Prophet (may 
God bless him and give him peace)”; and he told the Bendahara 
all that he had dreamt. And the Bendahara said, “If your dream 
was true, Sire, what is there to prove it?” And the Raja answer 
ed, “The fact that I am circumcised. That proves the truth of 
my dream about the Apostle of God (may God bless him and 
peace). And the Apostle of God said to me, “This afternoon! 154 , 
at the time of the *asar prayers, a ship will arrive from Juddah and 
from that ship a man will land and say prayers on this Malaka 
shore. Do as he bids you!” Then said the Bendahara, “If a 
ship does arrive at the time of the ‘asar prayers, then your dream 
will be true, Sire. If no ship comes, then of a surety it is the 
devilf 153a plaguing you!” And the Raja said, “I agree.” The 
Bendahara then returned to his house. 

And when it was the hour of ‘asar, a ship arrived from Juddah 
and proceeded to anchor. And from this ship a Makhdum dis¬ 
embarked, Saiyid 'Abdu'LAziz! 155 by name, and then prayed on 
the shore. And all who saw him were astonished at nis be¬ 
haviour and said, “What means this bobbing up and down?” 
And there was a general scramble to see him, the people crowd¬ 
ing together so thickly that there was not a space between one 
man and another and there was such a disturbance that the 
noise of it came to the ears of the Raja inside the royal apart¬ 
ments of the palace. And straightaway the Raja set forth on his 
elephant escorted by his chiefs and he perceived that the Makh- 
dum’s behaviour in saying his) prayers was exactly as in his dream. 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



54 


The Malay Annals 

[ 84 — 85 ] And he said to the Bendahara and the chiefs, 'That is exactly 
how it happened in my dreJim!” 

And when Makhdum Saiyid 'Abdu'l-Aziz had finished his 
prayers, the Raja made his elephant kneel and he mounted the 
Makhdum on the elephant and took him to the palace. And 
the Bendaharaf 156 and the chiefs embraced Islam; and every 
citizen of Malaka, whether of high or low degree, was commanded 
by the Raja to do likewise. As for the Raja himself, he received 
instruction in the Faith from Makhdum Saiyid 'Abdu’l-'Aziz, and 
he took the title of Sultan Muhammad Shah. The Bendahara 
was given the title of Sri Amar 'diraja and Tun Perpateh Besar was 
made Treasurer, with the title of Sri Nara 'diraja. [He had a 
daughter named Tun Rana Sandari]. Sultan Muhammad Shah 
then established the ceremonial of the court. 

It was hef 157 who first instituted royal privileges in regard 
to yellow, viz. that it could not be worn by commoners or used 
for cloths, for curtain fringes, for bolster ends, for mattresses or 
for any kind of wrapping. "You may not use it for stringing 
jewels, for the adornment of your houses or for any other pur¬ 
pose/' It was only for three things, viz. sarongs, jackets and 
handkerchiefs that it could be used. It was also a royal privi¬ 
lege to have enclosed verandahs, pillars that hung down not 
reaching to the ground, posts that went right up to the roof- 
beam or summer-houses, while on boats only royalty could have 
windows and reception cabins. In regard to umbrellas white was 
more strictly a royal privilege than yellow, for white umbrellas 
were reserved for rulers while yellow umbrellas could be used 
by princes. Commoners might not have metal casing on the 
sheath of the creese, whether covering it entirely or even going 
only half way up the sheath. Nor was it permitted to any com¬ 
moner, however high his rank, to wear anklets of gold: even with 
silver knobs gold anklets were a royal privilege. Any one who 
disobeyed this ordnance was guilty of Jese majeste and the 
penalty was death. No one who possessed gold, however rich he 
might be, was permitted to wear it unless f 158 it was a present 
from the Raja, when he might wear 1 it in perpetuity. No person, 
whoever he might be, might enter the palace without wearing his 
sarong in the overlap (?)t 159 fashion, his creese in frontf 160 and 
a scarf over his shoulders. Any one wearing his creese behind 
would have it confiscated by the gate-keeper. The penalty ! 161 
for disobedience of this order was death. 

When the king gave audience, principal ministers, senior 
war-chiefs and courtiers occupied f 162 the bodyf 163 of the hall of 
audience: princes of the blood royal occupied the gallery on the 
left and knights the gallery on the right: heralds and young war- 
chiefs stood at the footf 164 of the dais bearing swords, the heralds 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV. Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



55 


translated by C. C. Brown 

[ 85 ] 

on the left being descendants of ministers eligible for the appoint¬ 
ments of Bendaharaf 165 , Treasurer or Temenggong, and the chief 
heraldf 166 on the right being descended from a war-chief eligible 
for the appointment of Laxsamana or Sri Bija 'diraja: he who 
bore the title of Sang Guna was Laksamana-designate: and he 
who bore the title of Tun Pikrama was Bendahara-designate. At 
the paying of homage the chief of the four or five heraldsf 16 ! 
took precedence of the courtiers who sat in the body of the 
audience hall and of everybody except principal ministers. 
Chamf 168 shipmasters of high standing and young nobles (who 
held no office) occupied the balcony of the hall of audience. 
The Raja's personal requisitesf 169 , such as his cuspidore, goglet 
and fan [and shield and bow] were put in the passage, though 
the betel set was placed in the gallery. The sword or state was 
borne by the Laksamana or the Sri Bija 'diraja, whose position 
was in the gallery on the left. If envoysf 170 came, the letter was 
received by the chief herald on the right, while the Raja's reply 
to the envoys was announced by the herald on the left. The 
ceremonial prescribed for the arrival or departure of envoys was 
that a large tray and a salver were to be brought in by a slave 
from the palace; and the large tray was to be received by the 
herald on the right and set down as near to the throne as the 
Bendahara's seat. The shoulder-cloth and the salver were given 
to the bearer of the letter. If it was a letter from Pasai (or from 
Haru ?) it was received with full! 171 ceremonial equipment (? big 
drum,) trumpet, kettledrums and two whitef 171a umbrellas side by 
side and the elephant was brought alongside one end of the 
audience hall. For the Rajas of those twof 172 countries (Pasai 
and Haru) were regarded as equal (to the Raja of Malaka in 
greatness) and howeverf 173 they (the three) might stand to each 
other in point of age, it was 'greetings' (not 'obeisance') they 
sent to each other. To a letter from any other state less respect 
was accorded, only the big drum, the clarionet and a yellow 
umbrella being used. The letter was borne on elephantf 173a or on 
horseback as circumstances might demand, and it was taken 
down (from the elephant or horse as the case might be) outside 
the outer gate. If (it was a letter from) a Raja of some standing, 
the trumpet might be used and two umbrellas, one white and 
one yellow, and the elephant made to kneel outside the inner 
gate. 


Foreign envoys, event 174 those from Rekan, were given robes 
of honour on departure, as were our own envoys when departing 
on a mission. 

For the installation of a chief the Raja would give an audience 
such as was customary on the arrival of an envoy. The man to 
be installed was fetchedf 175 from his house with due ceremony. 
If he was of the standing of a chief, he was fetched by some one of 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society . 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



56 


The Malay Annals 

[ 85 — 86 ] high degree; if he was of lesser status, by a man of medium 
standing. If he was of the rank to be borne by elephant he was 
brought byf 176 elephant: if he was of the rank to be borne by 
horse, he was brought on horseback. If he was not of the rank 
to be borne by horse, he came on foot, with umbrella, drum 
and clarionet. As regards the umbrella however, some were en¬ 
titled to have a green umbrella, some a blue, some a red. The 
highest grade was the yellow, as yellow umbrellas are the 
umbrellas of princes and major chiefs, while a purple or red 
umbrella is that of courtiers, heralds and war-chiefs. A blue 
umbrella could be used by any one who was being installed. 

When the man who was to be installed arrived, he was 
halted and the chirijjj was read by an officer of the court before 
the Raja. After it had been read it was taken outside, to be 
received by one of the relatives of the man who was being 
installed: he wore the shoulder-cloth. Then the officer who 
read the chiri (before the Raja) put itf 177 on the head of the 
man who was being installed, and the latter was brought into the 
hall of audience, where a mat was laid for him at such place as 
the Raja wished, so that thereafter that should be his place in 
the hall. Robes of honour were then brought. If it was a Ben- 
dahara (who was being installed) five trays were used for the 
robes of honour: the jacket was laid on onef 178 , the headkerchief 
on another, the scarf on another, the waistband on another and 
the sarong on another. In the case of a prince or a minister or a 
knight, there were only four trays, the waistband being omitted. 
For a herald, courtier or war-chief there were three trays only— 
one for the sarong, one for the jacket and the third for the head¬ 
kerchief together with the scarf. Some were entitled to two 
trays only, one for the sarong and the other for the jacket and 
the headkerchief. In some cases all the articles of raiment were 
put on one tray, while in others there was no tray at all and the 
sarong, jacket and headkerchief were just heaped together and 
borne on the raised and upturned hands of the slave who carried 
them. When they reached the man who was being installed, 
lie folded his arms round them and took them outside. The 
procedure was the same in regard to robes of honour for envoys, 
each envoy being treated according to his rank. 

When the robes of honour were brought, the man to be in¬ 
stalled went out and put them on. He then came in again and 
was invested with frontlet and armlets, for any one installed 
wore armlets, but they varied with rank: some had armlets with 
dragon and clasp, some had jewelled armlets, some had armlets 
with clasp only, some had armlets made in the shape of aroid 
fronds, some had armlets of silver. When that had been done, 
the man who was being installed did homage and then went 

5 Formula of investiture. 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV. Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 





57 


translated by C. C. Brown 

[ 86 — 87 ] home, escorted either by the man who had fetched him or by 
some one else of appropriate rank. He was taken home in proces¬ 
sion : in some cases the only instruments used were the drum and 
clarionet, in others the trumpet was added, and in yet other 
cases there were the kettledrums and white umbrellas as well, 
though in former days it cost money to get white umbrellas 
and kettledrums; even yellow umbrellas and trumpets were hard 
to procure. 

If the Raja left the palace, on days that the litter was used 
the Treasurer held the head of the litter, with the Temenggong 
holding it on the right and the Laksamanaf 179 on the left, while 
the rear end of the litter was held by the two chief heralds. 
Opposite the chain near the Raja's knee the Laksamana (sic) held 
the litter on the right and the Sri Bija 'diraja held it on the left. 
Heralds and war-chiefs marched in front of the litter, each carry¬ 
ing the insignia assigned to him. The regalia were borne by 
men marching in front of the Raja; and there was one state lance- 
on the right and one on the left. In frontf 180 of the Raja 

went.the heralds bearing the swords of state (and ?) in 

front (of them ?) those who carried spears. What was called 
the 'standard'f 181 was in front of the Raja, as were the drums 
and kettledrums on the Raja's right and the trumpets on his left. 
For in a procession the right ranked higher than the left, whereas 
in regard to seating the left ranked higher than the right, which 
applied also when an audience was given. (In a procession), of 
those who marched in front of the Raja it was those of lower rank 
who led the way. In front of all went the lances and pennons 
followed by the musical instruments of every description. Behind 
the Raja went the Bendahara with the chief ministers and judges. 

If the Raja went by elephant, the Temenggong rode on the 
elephant’s head, while the Laksamana or Sri Bija 'diraja, bearing 
the sword of state, rode on the croup. At courtsf 182 when the 
drum of sovereignty was beaten the major chiefs were on the 
left of the drum and the minor chiefs on the right. The sireh* 
at such a court was given in the following order; first, members 
of the ruling house; then (the Bendaharaf 183 ?; then) the 
Treasurer, then the Temenggong; then the four chief ministers; 
then the Laksamana; then the Sri Bija 'diraja; then the principal 
courtiers; then the knights. But it was only if the Bendahara 
was present that sireh was given: if he was not present the sireh 
nobat was not given even though members of the ruling house 
were there. 

If royal celebrationsf 184 were being held , it was the Treasurer 
who was master of ceremonies and directed the laying of mats 
in the hallf 185 of audience, the decoration of the inner hall and 

* betel-leaf. 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 




58 


The Malay Annals 


£ 87 — 88 ] 


the hanging of ceiling-cloths. He inspected the food that was 
to be served and gave orders f 18(5 for the proclaiming of people 
by name and summoning them to the throne. For all ser¬ 
vants and clerks of the Raja were under the Treasurer's control. 
Under him too were the Shahbandar and all those in charge of 
the revenues of the state. It was the Treasurer too who gave 
orders for the summoning of people, while it was the 
Temenggongf 187 who arranged the guests for feeding! 188 in the 
inner hall. There were not more than four people to a dish, 
and this applied from the top downwards. If one of the four 
to share the dish was missing, three were left to share it: if there 
were two missing, two remained to share the dish: and if there 
were three missing, the one man had the dish to himself. People 
from below could not be brought up to fill missing places; still 
lessf 189 could people from above be moved down for that purpose. 
But ceremonial custom prescribed that the Bendahara should have 
a dish to himself or share one withf 189a members of the ruling 
house. Thus was the ceremonial custom in the days of (the) 
Malacca (sultanate). And there is much more that could be told; 
but to go into every detail would be bewildering to the listener. 


For the festival of the night of the twenty-seventh! 190 of 
Ramdlan the following was the procedure. While it was still 
day the (? Laksamanaf 189b took the) royal praying-mat in proces¬ 
sion to the mosque, the Temennggong sitting on the 
head of the elephant. To the mosque too were taken the 
betel bowl and other personal requisites of the Raja, and 
the drums (?)! 191 . Then when night had fallen, the Raja 
proceeded to the mosque, the ceremonial being as for the 
days when the Raja assisted at the evening prayers, followed 
by the special vespers, of the fasting month. When the 
prayers were concluded the Raja returned to the palace. On 
thq following day the Laksamana took the royal turban in proces¬ 
sion, for it was the custom that Malay Rajas going to the mosque 
should wear the turban f 192 and the cassock. These were the 
privilege of royalty and could not be worn for weddings except 
By special permission of the Raja, when they might be worn. 
Similarly dressing in the Kalinga fashion for weddings or Hari 
Raya prayers was permitted (? only) to those whose national 
dress such apparel was. 


On the lesser Hari Raya or the greater, the Bendahara and 
the chiefs went into the palace, and the royal litter was brought 
into the palace domain in procession from the house! 193 of the 
Treasurer. As soon as they saw the litter taken into the palace 
all those in the audience hall came out. The Raja! 194 then 
appeared and was taken in procession, mounted on an elephant, 
to the royal dais, which he ascended. When the peonle saw 
the Raja, they all sat on the ground and the litter was brought 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



59 


translated by C. C. Brown 

[ 88 ] alongside the dais. The Bendahara! 195 thereupon ascended! 196 
the dais to conduct the Raja to the litter, which he mounted, and 
he was then borne to the mosque, with the procedure already 
described. That was the approved ceremonial. If there are errors 
in the description, it is the duty of anyone who remembers the 
history to correct them; and your humble servant trusts that he 
will not incur censure. 

Throughout his long reign Sultan Muhammad Shah shewed 
a high degree of justice in his treatment of his subjects, and 
Malaka became a great city. Strangers flocked thither and its 
territory stretched westward! 197 as far as Bruas Ujong and east¬ 
ward as far as Trengganu Ujong Karang. And from below the 
wind to above the wind Malaka became famous as a very great 
city, the Raja of which was sprung from the line of Sultan Iskan- 
dar DzuTKarnain: so much so that princes from all countries 
came to present themselves before Sultan Muhammad Shah, who 
treated them with due respect bestowing upon them robes of 
honour of the highest distinction together with rich presents of 
jewels, gold and silver. 

God knoweth the truth. To Him do we return. 

Chapter VII 

The story of Mani Purindan of Pahili in Kalinga who leaves his 
home after a quarrel with his brother and decides to go to* 
Malacca to do homage to the Raja. 

Sultan Muhammad Shah dies after a reign of 57 years and is 
succeeded by his son Raja Ibrahim with the title of Sultair 
Abu Shahid: but the Raja of Rekan acts as regent until Raja 
Kasim, Sultan Abu Shahid’s brother, seizes the throne. The 
Raja of Rekan is killed but before he dies he kills Sultan Abu: 
Shahid. Raja Kasim becomes Sultan Muzaffar Shah, shews him¬ 
self to be a wise and humane ruler and orders the making of 
a code of laws. Bettdahara Sriwa Raja fancying that he 
has incurred the Sultan's displeasure t&kes poison. 

(Shellabear, chapter XII). 

Here now is the story of a city in Kalinga called Pahili, the 
Raja of which was called NizamuTMuluk Akar Shah. He was a 
Muhammadan, in the Faith of Prophet Muhammad, the Apostle 
of God (may God bless him and give him peace): and he had 
three children, a daughter and two sons. The elder son was 
called Baginda Mani Purindan and the younger Raja Akar Muluk 
Shah. On the death of Raia Nizamul-Muluk Akar Shah, his 
younger son, Raja Akar Muluk Shah, succeeded to the throne! 198 . 
And as he was dividing the inheritance with his brother 
and sister, in accordance with the law of Almighty God, they 
came to a! 199 chuki§ board which was made of gold and had 
jewelled pips, one set being of red gems and the other of green 

5 A game resembling go bang (W.) 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 




60 


The Malay Annals 

|88—89] gems. And Baginda Mani Purindan said to his brother, Raja 
Akar Muluk Padshah, “Let our sister have this chuki board, 
it is more suitable for her than for us.” But Raja Akar Muluk 
Padsha answered, “I do not agree to that. I say that we should 
value the board, and if our sister wants it, she shall give us the 
price of it.” And Baginda Mani Purindan felt himself humiliated 
by his brother's refusal to adopt his suggestion, and he thought 
to himself, “If in a trifling matter like this my brother won't 
accept what I suggest, how much the less will he do so in a 
matter of importance? If this is to be the case, I had better 
go into exile. Even i£ I stay here, it is not I but my brother 
who will be the ruler in this city. Can I do better than betake 
myself to Malaka, for the Raja of Malaka is the great Raja in 
these days and it is right that I should own him as my lord, 
for he is sprung from the line of Raja Iskandar Dzu'l-Karnain.” 
When he was thus resolved Baginda Mani Purindan made ready 
a fleet of many ships and sailed for Malaka. 

But when he reached jambu Ayer a great storm arose and 
the ship of Baginda Mani Purindan foundered. He was pitched 
into the water and fell astride the back of a barracouta, which 
bore him rapidly to the shore. And when they struck the shore 
Baginda Mani Purindan caughtf 199a hold of a gandasouli to help 
himself out of the water and landed. And that is why Baginda 
Mani Purindan forbade his descendants ever to eat barracouta of 
wear gandasouli flowers. Baginda Mani Purindan then went on to 
Pasai, where the Raja married him to his daughter: and it is 
from this line that the Rajas of Pasai are descended. [Sultan 
Khamis, father of Raja Suta whom Baginda Mani Purindan 
divorced, was related to the Malays]. 

And after he had spent some while in Pasai, Baginda Mani 
Purindan returned to Kalinga and had ships made ready. And 
when the sailing season arrived, Baginda Mani Purindan set 
sail for Malaka with his soldiers under the command of Khoja 
'‘Ali and Tandil Muhammad and with five vessels accompanying 
him. And when they reached Malaka, Baginda Mani Purindan 
(forthwith presented himself before Sultan Muhammad Shah 
who gave him in the hall of audience the rank of a minister). 
He was then takenf 200 as son-in-law by the Sri Nara 'diraja who 
married him to his daughter, Tun Ratna Sandari. By her 
Baginda Mani Purindan had two children;. a son named Naina 
Madi and a daughter named Tun Rana Wati, who became the 
wife of Bendahara Sri Amar 'diraja and bore him a son called 
Tun 'Ali. 

And Bendahara Sri Amar 'diraja returned to the Mercy of 
God and was succeeded as Bendahara by Perpateh Sandang with 
the title of Sriwa Raja. And the Sri Nara 'diraja died, where- 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV. Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



61 


translated by C. C. Brown 

[89 _ 90 ] upon Tun 'Ali, son of Bendahara Sri Amar 'diraja by Tun Ratna 

Wati, daughter of Baginda Mani Purindan, became Treasurer 
with the title of Sri Nara 'diraja. 

And Sultan Muhammad Shah married a princess of Rekan, 
by whom he had a son named Raja Ibrahim. By his other wife, 
the Bendahara’s daughter, he also had a son, called Raja Kasim. 
The latter was older than Raja Ibrahim, but it was the desire 
of the queen that even so Raja Ibrahim should succeed his father, 
and Sultan Muhammad Shah acquiesced despite his fondness 
for Raja Kasim: Such was the deference that he paid to the 
queen’s wishes that he was helpless, allowing Raja Ibrahim to 
do just as he pleased but chiding Raja Kasim if he took so much 
as a bit of sireh leaf from anyone. The people however hated 
Raja Ibrahim and liked Raja Kasim. 

And the Raja of Rekan came to Malaka to present himself 
before the king, and he was treated with great distinction by 
Sultan Muhammad Shah because the queen was his relative, and 
he was given f 201 the same precedence as the Bendahara in the 
hall of audience, though seated below him at table. Hence the 
Rekan war-chiefs said to their Raja, "How comes it that we are 
as fowls, sleeping on the roof but made to feed under the 
house? Far better were it that we take our leave of this place!” 
The Raja of Rekan then took his seat below the Bendahara, with 
the acquiescence of Sultan Muhammad Shah. 

And after that, when Sultan Muhammad Shah had reigned 
for fifty-seven years, then in the process of time he left this 
perishable world to go to one that abideth: as it is written 
■"To God we belong and to Him we return.” And (after the 
deathf 202 of Sultan Muhammad Shah) his son, Raja Ibrahim, 
succeeded him upon the thone, with the title, as ruler, of Sultan 
Abu Shahid. The Raja of Rekan however acted as regent! 203 
for him and the city of Malaka was, as it were, ruled by the 
Raja of Rekan. Raja Kasim was commanded by the Raja of 
Rekan to take up his abode with a fisherman, and every day 
he went to sea .to fish. Now that the Raja of Rekan was, as 
it were, ruler of Malaka, Sultan Abu Shahid being still a minor, 
the chiefs, ministers and war-chiefs assembled before the Benda¬ 
hara to take counsel. And the ministers and war-chiefs said, 
MIow stand we all? It seems that it is the Raja of Rekan who 
is our master, not Raja Abu Shahid!” And Bendahara Sriwa 
Raja answered, "What can we do? The Raja of Rekan never 
leaves our ruler s side!” And when they heard the words of the 
Bendahara the chiefs sat silent and then they departed each to 
his house. But the Sri Nara 'diraja pondered the matter in 
his heart, and he constantly invited Raja Kasim to his house and 
set food before him, for Raja Kasim was his cousin. 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society . 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



62 


The Malay Annals 

[90*—92] And after a time a ship arrived from the regions above the 

wind. And when the ship had anchored the fish sellers all came 
to sell their fish to the crew. And Raja Kasim came selling 
fish like the other fishermen. Now there was aboard the ship 
a certain Maulanaf 204 called Maulana Jalalu'd-din Who, when he 
saw Raja Kasim, bade him come aboard and treated him withf 204a 
every mark of respect. And when Raja Kasim asked, “Why do you 
treat me with such respect sir, seeing that I am only a fish seller 
selling fish?" Maulana Jalalu'd-din answered, “You are a son of 
the Raja in this city, and one of these days you will be Raja of 
Malaka!" And Raja Kasim said, “How am I to become Raja? If 
I had your spiritual power to help me, Maulana, I might become 
Raja. And the Maulana replied. “Go ashore, sir, and seek some 
one who can carry through this affair of yours: God willing, it will 
be successfully accomplished. But I ask you in return to promise 
that the princess whom the Raja of Rekan has taken as consort 
shall be given to me." And Raja Kasim said. “Very well—if 
I become Raja!" Then said the Maulana, “Hasten ashore, sir, 
and set to work this night, verily God Almighty is with you!" 
Raja Kasim then went ashore, thinking to himself, “Whither 
else should I go than to the Sri Nara 'diraja for he is my cousin 
and maybe will help me?" When he was thus resolved, Raja 
Kasim went to the Sri Nara 'diraja and told him what the 
Maulana had said. He then asked the Sri Nara 'diraja if he 
would help him to seize the throne. And the Sri Nara 'diraja 
replied that he would; whereupon they entered into a solemn 
pact and the Sri Nara 'diraja set about collecting supporters. 
(That night) Raja Kasim mounted the elephant “Juru Demang", 
with the Sri Nara 'diraja on the elephant's head: and the crew 
of the ship came ashore, every man fully armed. And the Sri 
Nara 'diraja said to Raja Kasim, “What think you should be done? 
For if the Bendahara is not on our side, we shall not succeed." 
And Raja Kasim said, “What think you then?" And when the Sri 
Nara 'diraja answered, “Let us go to the Bendahara!", Raja 
Kasim said, “Very well, I will do whatever you think best." 

So Raja Kasim and the Sri Nara 'diraja went to the 
Bendahara. And when they came to the fence round the Benda- 
hara's house, the Sri Nara 'diraja said, “Take word forthwith to 
Bendahara Sriwa Raja that the Ruler waits without." The 
Bendahara was immediately informed, and he left his house there 
and then, without his creese and only putting on his headkerchief 
as he came. It was a pitch dark night. When the Bendahara 
reached the foot of his stairs, the Sri Nara 'diraja made the 
elephant kneel and said, “Bendahara, the Raja bids you mount." 
The Bendahara mounted forthwith, and the elephant rose 
to his feet and set forward. When the Bendahara saw the gleam 
of many weapons and perceived that the Raja was not Sultan 
Abu Shahid, he could not believe his eyes. And the Sri Nara 

Journal Malayan *Branch [Vol. XXV. Pt. II & II.T 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



63 


translated by C. C. Brown 

[92—93] ‘diraja said to the Bendahara, “Raja Kasim means to kill the 
Raja of Rekan! What think you, sir?” The Bendahara could 
only reply, “Excellent! 205 ! For Raja Kasim too has my allegiance 
and I have alwaysf 206 wanted to settlef 206a the account of the Raja 
of Rekan!” Tnese words of the Bendahara gladdened the heart 
of Raja Kasim. 

He thereupon proceeded to storm the palace. And there 
was great excitement as the tale went round, “Raja Kasim is 
storming the palace!” The principal chiefs, the lesser chiefs and 
the war-chiefs then came in quest of the Bendahara, and when 
they were told that he had gone with Raja Kasim, they thought 
to themselves, “This is the Bendahara's doing”. So they all went 
to the Bendahara and joined Raja Kasim, for he was a general 
favourite. And resistance from within the palace was over¬ 
powered; but the Raja of Rekan never left the side of Sultan 
Abu Shahid. And the Sri Nara ‘diraja said. “The Raja bids 
us seize Sultan Abu Shahid lest he be slain by the Raja of Rekan!” 
In vain went up the cry that the Raja of Rekan should not be 
stabbed; it was unheard in the general uproarf 207 , and the Raja 
of Rekan was stabbed to the heart. No sooner had he felt the 
wound than he stabbed Sultan Abu Shahid, who died a martyr's 
death. He had reigned for a year and five months. 

On the Raja's death, Raja Kasim succeeded to the throne 
and was duly installed, with the title of Sultan Muzaffar 
Shah. The Maulana then asked for fulfilment of the promise 
made to him. The king accordingly gave orders for one of the 
women attendants, who was a pretty girl, to be decked out in 
finery, jewels and all; and she was given to the Maulana as the 
Rekan princess. Thinking that she was in fact the Rekan princess, 
the Maulana accepted her and took her away with him to the 
regions above the wind. When he had come to the throne Sultan 
Muzaffar Shah shewed himself to be a Raja of high character, just 
and humane, diligent in inquiry into the pleas of his people: and 
it was he who ordered the compilationf 207a of a code of laws in 
order that there should henceforward be uniform justice in the 
decisions of his ministers. As for the Sri Nara ‘diraja, he 
became a great favourite of the Raja who never opposed any 
thing that he said or asked. And Sultan Muzaffar Shah took 
as his consort the daughter of Radinf 207b Anum; by her he had a 
son who was very handsome and was given the name of Raja 
‘Abdul. 

It happened one day that Sultan Muzaffar Shah was giving 
an audience and it had lasted so long a time before the Benda¬ 
hara arrived at the palace to present himself that Sultan Muzaffar 
Shah retired, not knowing that the Bendahara had come: and 
as the Sultan went into the palace the door was slammed to by 

J952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



64 


The Malay Annals 

[93]_ the wind. Whereupon Bendahara Sriwa Raja thought to him¬ 
self, "I have incurred the Ruler's displeasure. No sooner do I 
appear than the Raja retires and the door is shut!" And he 
returned to his house and took poison, from which he died. 
Sultan Muzaffar Shah was forthwith informed that the Bendahara 
had taken poison and was dead. And when he was told why 
the Bendahara had taken poison, he was overhelmed withf 207c 
grief. And he went and buried the Bendahara with all the 
traditional ceremony: nor for seven days and seven nights did he 
allow the royal bandf 208 to play, as he mourned for the 
Bendahara. The king then appointed the Sri Nara 'diraja 
to be Bendahara. Now Bendahara Sriwa Raja had three child¬ 
ren: the eldest was a girl and the younger two were both boys. 
The girl was called Tun Kudu: she was extremely beautiful 
and Sultan Muzaffar Shah married her. The second child was 
called Tun Perak and the youngest Tun Perpateh Puteh. Tun 
Perak was not givenf 209 any appointment at court, so he went 
away to Klang, where he married and settled down. And when 
after a while the people of Klang discarded their headman, they 
went and presented themselves before the Raja in Malaka to 
ask for another. And when Sultan Muzaffar Shah asked them 
whom they wanted, they replied, “If it please your Highness, 
it is Tun Perak that we crave should be given to us as our 
headman." Their request was granted and Tun Perak was made 
headman of Klang. 


Chapter VIII 

The Siamese attack Malacca but are defeated. Tun 
Perak’s vigorous ripostes against Malacca criticisms of his con* 
duct earn Sultan Muzaffar’s approval and he is made Paduka 
Raja and told to live at Malacca. His quarrel with the Sri 
Nara ‘diraja and how Sultan Muzaffar reconciled them. He 
is made Bendahara and is described as one of the three out¬ 
standing men of his time. The Siamese again attack and 
again the attack is repelled. Sultan Muzaffar then decides to 
try and make friends with Siam and sends Tun Telanai as 
envoy. The success of his mission. 

(SheJIabear, Chapter XIII ) 

Here now is the story of the Raja of Siam. From ancient 
times the country of Siam was known as Shahru'n-nuwi, and all 
princes of these regions below the wind were subject to Siam, 
the Raja of which was called the Bubunnyaf 210 . And when the 
news reached Siam that Malaka was a great city but was not 
jsubject to Siam, the Bubunnya sent an envoy to Malaka to 
demand a letter! 211 of 'obeisance': but Sultan Muzaffar Shah 
refused to own allegiance to Siam. The Raja of Siam was very 
angry and ordered an expedition to be made ready for the in¬ 
vasion of Malaka. Awi Chakraf 212 was to command the ex¬ 
pedition and to take a vast army with him. And word was 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV. Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



65 


translated by C. C. Brown 

[93—94] brought to Sultan Muzaffar Shah that the Raja of Siam had 
ordered Awi Chakra, his war-chief, to lead an army, in numbers 
past counting, overland to Ulu Pahang. 

When Sultan Muzaffar Shah heard this, he gave orders that 
all men of the outlying districts be assembled and come up 
river to Malaka. And all the men of the outlying districts 
foregathered in Malaka. Now Tun Perak had brought the men 
of Klang to Malaka with womenfolk accompanying them. And 
the men of Klang went to the Raja and told him what had 
happened, saying, ''May it please your Highness, from the other 
districts are come to Malaka none but men, whereas Tun Perak 
has brought us with our women ” When Sultan Muzaffar Shah 
heard the words of the men of Klang, he said to one of his 
heralds, Sri Amarat by name, "Whenf 213 Tun Perak comes 
to the palace, tell him what the men of Klang have said." Now 
Sri Amarat was a Pasai man by origin and bore the name of 
Patehf 214 Semudra, but because of his shrewdness and his clever 
tongue the Raja gave him the title of Sri Amaratf 215 . And he 
had a heavy stool made for him which was placed at the 
Raja's knees. There Sri Amarat stood with his sword on his 
shoulder and it was he who communicated any command the 
Raja might have to give. Later Tun Perak came to present 
himself before the Raja, and the herald who bore the title of 
Sri Amarat said to him, 'Tun Perak, the men of Klang have 
made representations to his Highness the Ruler that whereas 
in the case of other districts it is only men who have come 
hither to present themselves before the Raja, the men of Klang 
have been brought by you before the Raja accompanied by their 
womenfolk. Why have you behaved thus?" But Tun Perak 
made no answer; and even when Sri Amarat repeated his ques¬ 
tion, Tun Perak still made no answer .It was not until Sri 
Amarat had said his say a third time that Tun Perak made answer, 
thus:— "Sri Amarat, (the Ruler has appointed you to be a 
herald and has given you a sword;) that* 236 sword it is your 
business to look after, that it may not rust or lose its edge. As 
for the affairs of met 217 and my men who are on duty, what 
should you knowf 238 about them? At the present time His 
Highness the Ruler here in this city has his consort with him 
and all that he requires. Is it right in yourf 219 judgment that 
we should come hither just we men by ourselves, with Klang so 
far away? If Malacca here is in troublev whatf 220 will my men 
(far away in Klang) care? That is why I have brought 
the men of Klang along with their womenfolk so that they 
may battle against the enemy to the best of their pbwers. 
For they will be not so much fighting for his Highness the 
Ruler as using their spears with might and main for the sake 
of their womenfolk!" And Sultan Muzaffar Shah smiled when 
he heard the words of Tun Perak, and he said, "Tun Perak 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



(66 


The Malay Annals 

(94—-95] is right.” And taking sireh from his bowlf 221 he gave it to 
Tun Perak, saying, "You are wasted at Klang, Tim Perakf You 
must come and live in the city” 

Meanwhile the men of Siam arrived, and they fought with 
the men of Malaka. After a long battle, in which many of the 
soldiers of the Raja of Siam were killed, Malaka still held outf 222 
and the Siamese withdrew. On their retreat they flungf 223 
down in Ulu Muar the rattans they had used for tying their 
baggage. These rattans took root and grew, and they are there 
to this day, known as the rattans of the Siamesef 223a . 
Similarly the woodf 224 they used for fetters took root and is 
growing to this day in Ulu Muar; as are the wooden rests for 
the cooking-places of the Siamese. And after the Siamese had 
gone back to their country, the men from the outlying districts 
of Malaka returned to their homes. But Tun Perak was not 
allowed by the Raja to go back to Klang and stayed on in 
Malaka. 

Now there was a man of Klang who asserted that he had 
suffered some wrong at the hands of Tun Perak and he submitted 
a complaint to his Highness the Ruler. And Sultan Muzaffar 
Shah ordered Sri Amarat to tell Tun Perak, "This man has com- 

E lained to His Highness the Ruler that he has, so he alleges, 
een wronged by you, Tun Perak.” But Tun Perak made no 
answer, and it was not until he had been spoken to three times 
that he replied, "Srif 225 Amarat, (you have been made a herald 
by the Ruler and have been given a sword) that same sword 
you treat with acid lest it lose its edge. As for the business of 
us who administer territory, what concern is that of yours? For 
territory is territory even if it is only the size of a coconut shell! 
Whatf 225a we think should be done we do, for the Ruler 

is not concerned with the difficulties we administrators 

encounter, he only takes account of the good results we 
achieve. But if His Highness the Ruler wishes to calif 223 

in question my conduct on the complaint of the man 

you speak of, let me first be dismissed from myf 227 office in 
klang and^hen let my conduct be calledf 228 in question. Is it 
right that that should be done, on the complaint of onef 229 who 
is no better than a slave, until I have been dismissed?" Sultan 
Muzaffar Shah found Tun Perak's reply to his liking and he 
said, "Tun Perak is wasted as a herald!” and he made him 
Paduka Raja with the same rank as the Sri Nara ‘diraja in the 
body of the hall of audience. The Sri Nara ‘diraja was by now 
an old man'and his wife had borne him no child, though^ by 
a secondary wife he had a son named Tun Shahid Madi, whom 
however he refused to own. But when Tun Shahid Madi had 
grown up and had children and even grandchildren of his own, 
it happened that one day as the Sri Nata ‘diraja was seated 

Journal Malayan Branch . [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



translated by G. C. Brown 6 T 

[95—96] in hisf 230 hall receiving company. Tun Shahid Madi went 
past. The Sri Nara 'diraja called him and when he came 
seated him upon his knee and said to those present, "This is my 
son/' To wnich they replied, "We all of us knew that, but 
as your Highness would not own him as your son, we were afraid 
to say that he was!" And the Sri Nara 'diraja smiled. 

[Now Baginda Mani Purindan had returned to the Mercy 
of God, and he was succeeded by his son Naina, Madi with the 
title of Tun Bijaya Maha Mentri.] When the Paduka Raja 
was made a major chief, the Malays were divided, some cleaving 
to the Paduka Raja and some to the Sri Nara 'diraja, both being; 
equally men of old family. And there was discordf 231 between 
the Sri Nara 'diraja and the Paduka Raja. Sultan Muzaffar 
Shah was aware of this and he set himself to effect a reconcilia¬ 
tion between them. So he sent for the Sri Nara 'diraja; and when 
he appeared, he said to him, "Are you minded to take a new 
wife, Sri Nara 'diraja?” And the Sri Nara 'diraja answered, 
"If your Highness will give me one, yes, your Highness!” And, 
the king asked, "Would you like Tun Kumalu?' "No, thank 
your Highness,” replied the Sri Nara 'diraja. Then the king 
asked, "Would you like Tun Bulan, Orang Kaya Hitam's 
daughter?” And the Sri Nara 'diraja answered, "No, thank your 
High ness.” And though Sultan Muzaffar Shah mentioned the 
daughters of any number of chiefs, none of them were to the 
Sri Nara 'diraja's liking and he stillf 231a said "No, thank you.” 
Finally Sultan Muzaffar Shah asked, "Would you like Tun 
Kuduf 231b , Sri Nara 'diraja?” Thereupon the Sri Nara 'diraja 
answered. "Your Majesty!” Now Tun Kudu, who was a sister of 
the Paduka Raja and a daughter'of Bendahara Sriwa Raja, was still 
married to the Ruler. As soon therefore as the Sri Nara 'diraja 
said he would like Tun Kudu, the king divorced her there and 
then, and sent her to the Paduka Raja's house. But the Sri 
Nara 'diraja's people said to him,/ -'How would you be taking; 
to yourself a young wife, Datok? You're an old man now and 
your eyebrows have turned white!” To which he replied,, 
"Howf 232 do you know (that I. am too old to be marrying a 
young wife)? If it is as you say, my father got a bad bargains 
in the chula he paid a catty of gold for in Kalinga!” And when 
the period of Tun Kudu's iddah had expired, the Sri Nara 
'diraja took her to wife. And the Sri Nara 'diraja was reconciled 
with the Paduka Raja and they became as fond of each other 
as twin brothers. And the Sri Nara 'diraja said to Sultan Muzaffar 
Shah, "Your Highness, it would be well to appoint the Paduka 
Raja to be Bendahara, son of a Bendahara asf 233 he is.” And 
the king agreed; and the Paduka Raja was made Bendahara. 

* A talisman for increasing virility. 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 




68 


The Malay Annals 

[96—97] It was Bendahara Paduka Raja who was accounted as an 
outstandingly able man: for at that time just as there were three 
cities of equal greatness, first Majapahit, second Pasai and third 
Malaka, so in tnose three cities there were threef 234 outstanding 
men, the Aria Gajah Mada Majapahit, the Raja Kenayan in Pasai 
and Bendahara Paduka Raja in Malaka. [The Sri Nara 'dirajaf 235 
was made Treasurer]. 

And after a while the Siamese (again) f 236 attacked Malaka, 
under the command of Awi Dichu. And when the news of 
their coming reached Malaka, Sultan Muzaffar Shah commanded 
Bendahara Paduka Raja to make readyf 237 a fleet to repel the 
attack, the Sri Bija 'diraja and war-chiefs to accompany him. [The 
Sri Bija 'diraja was of Malay descent; his name was Tun Hamzah 
and he was of the Muntahf 238 Lembu stock. It was he who was 
known as the Chief with a Stoop. Whether he walked or sat 
down, it was always with a stoop: but let word come of an 
attack by a foe and he would straighten himself there and then. 
So strong and such a redoubtable fighter was he that he was 
made Sri Bija 'diraja and became principal war-chief, with pre¬ 
cedence. over all the other war-chiefs in the hall of audience]. 
When the fleet was ready, Bendahara Paduka Raja set out to 
repel the Siamese, and with him went the Sri Bija 'diraja and 
the war-chiefs. The Siamese by this time had almost reached 
Batu Pahat. 

Now the Sri Bija 'diraja had a son named Tun 'Umar who 
was a great fighter and a man of reckless bravery. This Tun 
'Umar was sent by Bendahara Paduka Raja to reconnoitre, and he 
set forth with a single boat, now edging forward, now coming 
back. And when he encountered the Siamese fleet, he straight¬ 
way attacked and sank two or three Siamese ships, then shot 
off to their flank. Then he returned and attacked other ships, 
again sinking two or three, after which he withdraw. 
The Siamese were astounded. Then when night had fallen 
Awi Dichu advanced, and Bendahara Paduka Raja ordered fire¬ 
brands to be fastened to mangrove andf 239 other trees growing 
along the shore. And when the Siamese saw these lights, so 
many that no man could number them, their war-chiefs said, 
"What a vast fleet these Malays must have, no man can count 
their ships! If they attack us, how shall we fare? Even one of 
their ships just now was more than a match for us!” And Awi 
Dichu replied, "You are right, let us return home!” Whereupon 
the Siamese returned to their country. 

[It was the Siamese who hewedf 239a the well of Batu Pahat]. 
The retreating Siamese were pursued by Bendahara Paduka Raja 
as far as Singapore. He then returned to Malaka and related to 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV. Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



69 


translated by C. C. Brown 

J97—98] Sultan Muzaffar Shah all that had happened. And the king was 
well pleased and bestowed upon the Bendahara robes of honour 
complete with the finest accessories, and the Sri Bija ‘diraja and 
the war-chiefs who accompanied Bendahara *Paduka Raja all 
received rewards from Sultan Muzaffar Shah. 

To return now to the Siamese on their retreat from Malaka. 
When they reached Siam, Awi Dichu went into the palace 
and presented himself before the Bubunnya, to whom he re¬ 
lated all that had happened. The Bubunnya had a son named 
Chau Pandan and it was he who gave an undertaking to his 
father that he would conquer Malaka. The Bubunnya accord¬ 
ingly gave orders for an expedition to be fitted out to go to 
Malaka. Hence the versef 240 

Chau Pandan, son of Siam's King, 

Malaka purposed to invade; 

Stonesf 240 * like flowers adorned his ring, 

The flowers alas! of tears were made! 

And the news reached Malaka that Chau Pandan, son of 
the Bubunnya, was to be sent by the king to invade Malaka. 
Now there was a certain Saivid, a servant of God, living at 
Malaka at that time; and he was so fond of archery that wherever 
he went he took his bow with him. It happened that at the 
time (the news reached Malaka?) Sultan Muzaffar Shah was 

g iving an audience at which all his chiefs were present, and this 
aiyid was there also. When he heard the report about the 
Siamese, he drew his bow, in front of Sultan Muzaffar Shah, 
pointing it towards Siam; and as he shot the arrow he said, 
^Chau Pandan isf 241 dead!" At that moment Chau Pandan was 
still in Siam, when suddenly he felt as though he had been 
shot in the chest by an arrow; and he vomited blood and died. 
There was consequently no invasion of Malaka by the Siamese. 
And the news came to Malaka that Chau Pandan had died as 
though from an arrow wound in the chest. When Sultan 
Muzaffar Shah heard the report, he said, “The Saiyid spoke but 
the truth", and he rewarded the Saiyid. 

And Sultan Muzaffar Shah said to his ministers, courtiers, 
Tieralds and officers, “What think you? Were it not better to 
:send envoys to Siam? How much longer shall this feud with them 
continue?" And the chief minister answered, “What your 
Highness says is true. It is better to have many friends than 
many enemies." Sultan Muzaffar Shah then commanded! 242 
Tun Telanai, son of Bendahara Paduka Raja, to go as envoy 
with Mentri Jana Putra as his supporter. Tun Telanai made 
ships ready accordingly. His fief was Shuir, which at that time had 
a fleet of twenty sail, three-masted cruisers. Hence the versef 243 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



70 


The Malay Annals 

[98—99] Guy-ropes, where are the halliards? 

They are still being tightened; 

Tun Telanai, where's your cargo? 

Lying still at Teakwood Head! 

When the ships were ready, Sultan Muzaffar Shah said to 
Bendahara Paduka Raja and his ministers, “We desire that you 
compose our letter to Siam. It must neither be a letter of 
of obeisancef 244 nor one of greetings nor one of friendship." 
When Bendahara Paduka Raja heard these words, he said to the 
officers of state, “You have heard the Raja's command; com¬ 
pose a letter accordingly!" But not one of them felt himself 
equal to the task. The Bendahara inquired of them all, even 
downf 245 to those who carried the royal betel-bag and ewer, but 
none of them could do it. It was therefore the Bendahara him- 
self who composed the letter, worded as follows:— “A struggle 
between us can only result in heavy loss of life; and although in 
such a struggle we have the greatest respect for the might of 
Lord Bubunnya, yet because of our conhdence in his gracious 
consideration we send to him our envoys Tun Telanai and Mentri 
ana Putra", with more in the same strain. Sultan Muzaffar Shah 
iked the wording of the letter and it was completed accordingly, 
t was then borne in procession by elephant, the elephant being 
brought alongside! 246 the hall of audience. The letter was 
carried by a knight, on the head of the elephant was a herald 
and a minister acted as escort: and it was a procession in which 
two white umbrellas were carried, and the big drum, the clarionet 
and the trumpet of state were played. Tun Telanai and Mentri 
Jana Putra then did homage to the Raja and both were given 
robes of honour, after which they took their departure. 

When they reached Siam, word was brought to the Bubun¬ 
nya that envoys were come from Malaka. And the Bubunnya 
ordered that the letter they brought should be fetched with due 
ceremony from the ship and borne inf 244a procession. When the 
procession reached the hall of audience, the Bubunnya ordered 
his minister to read the letter; and when he heard how it was 
worded, he asked who had composed it. And Tun Telanai 
answered, “The Raja of Malaka's Prime Minister, your Highness." 
Lord Bubunnya then asked, “What is the name of the Raja of 
Malaka?" And Tun Telanai answered, “Sultan Muzaffar Shah." 
Whereupon the Bubunnya asked, “What is the meaning of 
Muzaffar Shah?" And when Tun Telanai made no answer,. 
Mentri Jana Putra replied, “The meaning of Muzaffar Shah is 
'he who is preserved by God from his enemies'." Then the Raja 
of Siam asked, “How was it that Malaka withstood the attack 
of Siam?" And Tun Telanai sent for a man of Suir (?Shuir), 
who was old and had elephantiasis in both legs, and he told him 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV. Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 




71 


translated by G C. Brown 

to shew his prowess with a spear in the presence of the Raja of 
Siam. The Suir man then hurled his spear into the air and 
placed his back in position to receive it: the spear fell on his 
back and bounced! 247 off it without inflicting any wound. 
‘'There is the reason, your Highness/’ said Tun Telanai, "why 
Malaka withstood the attack of Siam: all the men of Malaka 
aref 248 invulnerable!” And the Raja of Siam thought to him¬ 
self, "That is the truth. If even a manf 248a of the people like this 
fellow is proof against wounds, what must be the invulner¬ 
ability of their gentry!” Subsequently Lord Bubunnya set out 
to conquer a neighbouring country, taking with him Tun Telanai, 
Mentri Jana Putra and their followers. And he gave to them 
a place in the attack where the enemy was in strong force, but 
it happened that this place faced to the west. ,And Tun Telanai 
•consulted with Mentri Jana Putra, saying, "What are we to 
do? We have been sent to a place where the enemy is strongest 
and there are only a handful of us!” And Mentri Jana Putra 
replied, "All we have to do is to present ourselvesf 249 before 
the Raja like heralds and prefer a request.” So Tun Telanai 
and Mentri Jana Putra went to the Bubunnya and Mentri Jana 
Putra said, "Your Highness, it is the custom for us Muham¬ 
madans to face towards the west when we pray. We cannot 
therefore- face that way when we are fighting. We pray accord¬ 
ingly that you will graciously permit us to fight in another sector.” 
And Lord Bubunnya answered, "If you cannot face west, change 
to another part of the line.” . They were thereupon assigned by 
Pra Chau to a part of the line that faced east. Here the enemy 
were few in numbers and lightly armed, and presentlyf 250 by the 
grace of God victory \vas won:, but it was the men of Malaka 
who led the assault, followed at an interval] 2 ^ 1 by the men of 
Siam, And after the country had been conquered Pra Chau 
rewarded Tun Telanai and Mentri Jana Putra and their men, 
Tun, Telanai . being, rewarded a princess, named Otang 

iMinang, whom he took to wife. .He then took his leave of 
Pra Chau, who sent with him a letter accompanied by gifts. 
These 'were borne in procession to the ship, and Tun Telanai 
then set sail. 

After a while they reached Malaka, and Sultan Muzaffar Shah 
gave orders for the letter to be borne in procession with the 
same ceremonial as for the despatch of the envoys. And when 
the procession reached the hall of audience, the elephant was 
made to kneel there, the letter was received by a herald and 
the khatibf 252 was ordered to read it, wearing the shoulder-cloth. 
It ran thus, "This letter from Pra Chau Wadi comes to Awi 
Malaka”, whereafter came the rest of the letter. And when 
Sultan Muzaffar Shah heard the wording of the letter he was 
delighted and gave rewards to Tun Telanai and Mentri Jana 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



72 


The Malay Annals 

[ 100 ] Putra, and also to the Siamese envoys. And when the season 
came for the return voyage the Siamese envoys took their leave; 
and the king gave them robes of honour and a letter in reply 
to that of the Raja of Siam. The envoys then departed for Siam. 
According to the account we have received Tun Telanai had 
several sons and daughters by Otang Minang, one of whom. 
Tun 'Ali Harun, was Laksamanaf 253 . 

After Sultan Muzaffar Shah had reigned for forty years then, 
in the process of time, he died; as it is said To God we belong 
and to Him we return/ He was succeeded on the throne by 
his son Sultan 'Abdul, who as ruler took the title of Sultan 
Mansur Shah. He was seventeen years old when he came to 
the throne and had married a sister of the Sri Nara 'diraja but 
had no child by her as yet, though by a secondary wife he 
had a daughter named Princess Bakal. As a ruler Sultan Mansur 
Shah was very just and humane, and he was so handsome that 
he had no peer at that time. 

God knoweth the truth. To Him do we return. 

Chapter IX 

At Majapahit the Batara had died leaving no son. His 
daughter, Putri Nai Kesuma, marries the Raja of Tanjong 
Pura’s son who had been rescued from shipwreck by a toddy- 
tapper and becomes Batara. The offspring of the marriage 
is Radin Galoh Chendra Kiran, whose beauty is such that Sultau 
Mansur goes over to Majapahit to marry her; he is escorted 
by neihgbouring rajas and by Hang Tuah. The odd sense of 
humour of the Batara and his various efforts to get the better 
of his Malacca guests. The prowess of Hang Tuah. On the 
return to Malacca Hang Tuah gets into trouble with Sultan 
Mansur Shah, who orders the Sri Nara ‘diraja to put him to 
death. The Sri Nara ‘diraja however uses his discretion and 
merely hides him away, to produce him again later just when 
he is required to deal with Hang Kasturi. Sultan Mansur’s 
new palace is burnt down. The Raja of China sends a good¬ 
will mission to Malaka: his effort to impress Malacca with his 
greatness provokes an admirable riposte from Sultan Mansur* 
He sends his daughter from China to marry Sultan Mansur. 
On Sultan Mansur’s orders Pahang is attacked and conquered 
and the ruler (Maharaja Sura) is brought as a captive to 
Malacca. His skill with elephants. Death of Sri Nara ‘diraja 
Tun ‘Ali. 

( Shellabear ; chapter XIX for pp. 100-106 and 107 to 112 r 
then chapter XVI for pp. 112 (part) to 116: then chapter XV for 
pp. 116 (part) to 119: then chapter XIII for pp. 119 to 121 (bottom): 
then again chapter XVI to the end of this chapter). 

Here now is a story of Majapahit. The Batara had died 
leaving no son, though he had a daughter, named Radin Galoh 
Awi Kesumaf 254 , whom the Pateh Aria Gajah Mada made ruler* 
Now one day a toddy-tapper, who had gone sailing with his wife r 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV. Pt. II & IIF 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



73 


translated by C. C. Brown 

came across a boy adrift in the sea, clinging to a plank. He 
rescued the boy and took him aboard his boat: and he per¬ 
ceived that though the boy was unconscious as the result of 
long exposure in the water without food or drink, life was not 
yet extinct: as says Baginda 'Ali (may God be pleased with 
him) La maut ilia bfl-a/alu, that is to say, 'death only comes 
at the appointed hour'. The toddy-tapper dropped rice-gruel 
water into the boy's mouth; and the boy opened his eyes and 
perceived that he was on board a boat. The toddy-tapper then 
took him home with him and cared for him. 

After some days the boy recovered, and the toddy-tapper 
asked him, "Who are you and how came it that you were thus 
adrif on a plank?" And the boy answered, “If 255 am (the son 
of) the Raja of Tanjong Pura, descended from Sangf 255a Maniaka 
who first came down from Bukit Gantang Mahu Meru. My 
name is Radin Perlangu and I have two brothers and a sister. 
One day my father, the Raja of Tanjong Pura, set out to an 
island forf 255b sport, and when we were well out to sea a storm 
broke and the waves rose, so that the craft in which my father was 
sailing became unmanageable and was wrecked. My father, the 
Raja of Tanjong Pura, and my mother had no time to get into 
a boat but took to the water and swam after another ship. I 
myself clung to a plank and was carried out to sea by the current 
and the waves. I was afloat for seven days and seven nights, 
without food or drink. In the nickf 255c of time I fell in with you 
who have treated me so kindly: but if you wishf 256 to be even 
kinder to me, take me to my parents in Tanjong Pura, that they 
may give you reward without measure." And the toddy-tapper 
Teplied, "Yes, but what means have I of taking you to Tanjong 
Pura? Stay here with me and let me adopt you as my son, for 
I have no child of my own and I like your handsome young 
face." And Radin Perlangu said, "Very well then; whatever 
you wish, sir, I will do." And the toddy-tapper gave to the son 
of the Raja of Tanjong Pura the name of Kimas (?Kiai Mas) 
Jiwa, and great was the love of his wife and himself for the boy. 
Often would he say to him playfullyf 257 , "One of these days 
you will be Raja of Majapahit and have Princess Nai Kesuma for 
your bride! If you become Batara of Majapahit, you will 
makef 258 me Pateh Aria Gajah Mada!" And Kiai Mas Jiwa 
would answer, "Very well, if I become Batara of Majapahit, I 
will make you Pateh Aria Gajah Mada!" 

Now after Princess Nai Kesuma, the late Batara’s daughter, 
had been some time on the throne of Majapahit, with the 
Patah Aria Gajah Mada as regent, people would say, by way 
of compliment! 259 to the Pateh Aria Gajah Mada, that he was 
going to marry her. One day the Pateh Aria Gajah Mada put 
on old clothes and went out rowing with his servants, incognito. 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



74 


The Malay Annals 

[102—103] And the young men talked together; and one of them said, “If 
I was in the shoes of the Paten Aria Gajah, I'd carryf 260 off the 
Princess, so that I could become Raja. Wouldn't that be 
fine!" And another said, “Of course the Pateh Aria Gajah Mada 
is going to marry the Princess! He is practically the Raja in this 
country as it is. Who's going to say 'No'?" And when the 
Pateh Aria Gajah Mada heard what the young men said, he 
thought to himself, “So much for my devotion to duty!" The 
following day he presented himself before Princess Nai Kesuma 
and said, “Your Highness, it seem to me that now you are full 
grown you ought to take to yourself a husband, for it looks not 
well that you should be unwed." And Princess Nai Kesuma 
answered, “If you wish to have me married, sir, call together all 
the people in the city and let me take my choice. Whichever 
man is to my liking, him will I take for my husband." Then 
said the Pateh Aria Gaja Mada, “Very well, your Highness, I 
will assemble the people and whoever shall be your choice, even 
a dog or a cat, I will accept as my master." 

The Pateh Aria Gajah Mada accordingly ordered a proclama¬ 
tion to be made by beat of gong throughout! 201 Majapahit and 
all the adjacent territories, commanding all people to assemble 
at Majapahit because the Princess wished to select a husband. 
When that had been done, princes andf 262 ministers, courtiers, 
heralds and war-chiefs, and peasants whether of high or low degree, 
old or young, hunchbacks and cripples—all assembled at Maja¬ 
pahit. They came notf 263 so much because they were summoned 
to appear but rather because they wanted to come,for having 
heard that the Princess was going to select a husband, each of 
them thought that he might be the man to take the Princess' 
fancy. And when all were gathered together, Princess Nai Kesuma 
went up on to a balcony which commanded a view of the road 
and the Pateh Aria Gajah Mada gave orders for all the men to 
pass in front of the Princess one after the other This they did, 
but not one of them was to the liking of the Princess. 

After the others had filed past there came the adopted son 
of the toddy-tapper whom we mentioned just now. When 
Pricess Nai Kesuma saw him, he took her fancy; and she said 
to the Pateh Aria Gajah Mada, “It is that toddy-tapper's son 
that I like." And the Pateh Aria Gajah Mada answered, “It 
matters little who it is so long as your Highness takes a hus¬ 
band." And he sent forthwith for the toddy-tapper's son, took 
him home with him and made much of him. He then initiated 
the day and night festivities, seven days and seven nights, for 
the marriage or Pricess Nai Kesuma with the toddy-tapper's 
son: and when the seven days and seven nights were accom¬ 
plished, the toddy-tapper’s son was taken in procession round 
the city and was then married to the Princess. And after they 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II &TII 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



75 


translated by C. C. Brown 

1103] had been wedded they were deeply enamoured of each other: 
and it was this toddy-tapper’s son who became Batara of Maja¬ 
pahit, with the title of Sang Aji Ningrat. 

And the toddy-tapper, whose adopted son the Batara was, 
went to the palace and presented himself before the Batara, 
saying, “Whatf 264 of the promise your Highness gave to me 
formerly, that you would make me Pateh Aria Gajah Mada?” 
And the Batara replied, “ Wait awhile, old friend, I am still 
engaged upon the matter”. So the toddy-tapper went home, 
and the Batara of Majapahit pondered within himself, “How 
am I to dismiss the present Pateh Aria Gajah Mada? I have no 
fault to find with him, and he is the prop and stay of Majapahit. 
Without him the country would be ruined. But how am I 
going to make good my undertaking to him who adopted me 
as his son?” Prey to these reflections the king was sad at heart 
and for two or three days did not appear in public. When the 
Pateh Aria Gajah Mada saw how the Batara of Majapahit was 
behaving, he went into the palace and presented himself before 
the king, saying, “How comes it that your Highness has not 
appeared these two or three days?” And the Batara of Maja¬ 
pahit replied, “I have been sick.” Then said the Pateh Aria 
Gajah Mada, “It seems to me that your Highness is weighed 
down by some sorrow. Tell me what it is, that perchancef 265 I 
may be able to find the remedy.” And the Batara of Majapahit 
said to the Pateh Aria Gajah Mada, “The truth is, old friend, 
that I am not the son of the toddy-tapper, I am the son of 
the Raja of Tanjong Pura and am descended from the Raja 
(who came down from) Bukit Si-Guntang Mahameru.” 

He then went on to relate the whole strory of how his 
father had gone out sailing, how the ship had been wrecked 
how he had been rescued by the toddy-tapper and whatf 266 the 
toddy-tapper had said to him in jest. “Thus is it”, he con¬ 
tinued “that he who adopted me as his son now claims fulfil¬ 
ment of my promise to put him in your place, old friend. It 
is on this account that I am sorrowful.” And the Pateh Aria 
Gajah Mada, who was delighted to hear that the Batara of 
Majapahit was the son of the Raja of Tanjong Pura, said, Let 
your Highness appoint the toddy-tapper in my place and I will 
retire, for I am now an old man.” But the Batara of Majapahit 
answer, “I am loth to ‘ relieve you of your office, old friend, 
for I do not feel that he is equal to the work of the state.” 
“In that case”, said the Pateh Aria Gagah Mada, “when he 
comes to claim fulfilment of the promise made to him, let your 
Highness say to him ‘Although the office of Pateh Aria 
Gagah Mada is one of high distinction, yet its duties are 
exceedingly onerous and I fear they are beyond your powers, 
my old friend. There is however an even greater distinction 

19S2\ Royal. Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



[103—104] 


76 The Malay Annals 

which I will give you iff 267 you wish to take it; I will put all the 
toddy-tappers in the city under your control and you shall be 
their headman!' This cannot but please him." And the Batara 
of Majapahit answered, “That is an excellent plan, old friend." 
And the Pateh Aria Gajah Mada then withdrew. On the 
following day the toddy-tapper went into the palace and presented 
himself before the Batara, asking for redemption of the promise 
the Batara had made to him. The Batara of Majapahit then 
spoke to him exactly as the Pateh Aria Gajah Mada had suggested, 
and the toddy-tapper was delighted. And in the course of time 
Majapahit became so powerful that every district of Java was 
subject to it. And the Raja of Tanjong Pura came to hear that 
the Batara of Majapahit was his son and he sent messengers to* 
Majapahit to get a sight of the Batara. They went accordingly 
to Majapahit and when they had seen for themselves that the 
Raja was in fact the son of the Raja of Tanjong Pura, they 
hastened back to Tanjong Pura and reported to the Raja, “It is 
a fact that the Batara of Majapahit is your Highness' son." And 
the Raja of Tanjong Pura was overjoyed. And it was bruited 
abroad throughout every district of Java that he who had become 
the Batara of Majapahit was none other than the son of the 
Raja of Tanjong Pura. And the Batara had a daughter by 
Princess Nai Kesuma; her name was Radin Galoh Chendera 
Kirana and such was her beauty that the fame thereof spread 
from city to city and presently reached Malaka. And Sultan 
Mansur Shah conceived a great passion for Radin Galoh Chen¬ 
dera (Kirana) and determined to go to Majapahit. So he gave 
orders to Bendahara Paduka Raja to have ships made ready. 
And Bendahara Paduka Raja called together men to make ready 
the ships and set their equipment in good order, to the number 
of five hundred large ships as well as a vast assembly of small 
craft; for at that time Singapuraf 268 alone? had a fleet of forty 
three-masted cruisers. Leaving Bendahara Paduka Raja, the 
Sri Nara 'diraja, the Sri Bija 'diraja and the senior wanchiefs 
to keep guard over the city, Sultan Mansur Shah chose out (to 
accompany him) forty young nobles together with forty of his 
warriors! 269 of ancient lineage under the leadership of Tun 
Bija Sura. [It was this Tun Bija Sura who was the father of 
Tun Zainal Sri Bijaya 'diraja, who was known as Tun SebabJ 
(?Among these) Hang Tuah, Hang Jebat, Hang Kesturi, Hang 
Lekir, Hang Lekiu, Hang Khelembak, Hang 'Ali and Hang 
Iskandar (? had no rivals and) could do things thatf 270 none 
other could do. Hang Tuah in all that he did (and in any con- 
tets in which he engaged) excelled all others in cunning! 271 
and strength. If he was jesting! 272 with youths of his own age, 
he would roll up his sleeves and cry defiantly, “Only a Laksamana 
is my match!" Hence he was called “Laksamana" by his friends; 
and the name stuck and came into general use. Sultan Mansur 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV. Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



translated by C. C. Brown 


77 


[104—105] Shah then sent messengers to Indragiri, Palembang, Jambi, 
Lingga and Tungkalf 272a to bid Maharaja Merlang and the 
and the Raja of Palembang, Jambi, Lingga and Tungkal accom¬ 
pany him to Majapahit. They all consented to escort him; 
and when all had arrived. Sultan' Mansur Shah set forth for 
Majapahit, escorted by the men of Palembangf 272b and the 
Rajas of Indragiri, Jambi, Tungkal and Lingga and taking 
with him the young war-chiefs, while he left the chiefs to keep 
guard over the city. 

And after a voyage of some length they reached Majapahit. 
When news of their arrival came to the Batara of Majapahit he 
ordered his ministers! 2720 to welcome them and all the 
chiefs set out accordingly. It happened that at that time 
the Raja of Dahaf 273 and the Raja of Tanjong Pura, younger 
brother of the Batara of Majapahit, were both with the 
Batara. When the Raja of Malaka arrived, he was treated with 
great distinction by the Raja of Majapahit, who presented him 
with robes of honour with fittings set with precious stones, made 
him to sit above all other princes and gave him a creese with a 
fretted pattern along the edge of its collar-guard. He also gave 
forty other creeses to the Raja of Malaka's suite: the sheaths of 
all these creeses were broken. The creeset 274 given to the Raja 
of Malaka had first been given to the Raja of Daha, whose forty 
followers similarly were given creeses with their sheaths broken. 
The Raja of Daha ordered fresh sheaths to be made for all forty 
creeses, but the Raja of Majapahit ordered them to be stolen 
and all forty of them were stolen. The king then gave creeses 
to the Raja of Tanjong Pura and the same thing happened, the 
Raja of Tanjong Pura ordering sheaths to be made and the 
Batara of Majapahit ordering them to be stolen, and all forty 
of them were stolen. When however it came to the turn of 
the Raja of Malaka he ordered Tun Bijaya Sura to have the 
sheaths made and Tun Bijaya Sura bade the forty youngf 274a nobles 
of Malaka get the sheaths made, each of them to be responsible 
for one creese. And they took the creeses to the sheath-makers 
and after ordering a sheath to be made for each they stood over 
the sheath-makers until the work was done. It was finished 
that same day and the Javanese failed to steal a single creese. 
'This Raja of Malaka", said the Batara of Majapahit, "is the 
shrewdest prince of all!" 

Now the hall in which the Batara sat when giving an audi¬ 
ence was raised up from the ground. It had three steps leading 
up to it (and the Raja's slaves sat below on the floor). They! 275 
had tied up a dog in the hall: it was secured by a golden chain 
and was right in front of the Raja of Malaka. When Tun Bija 
Sura perceived this, he accoutred himself as a swordsman t 276 , 
carrying a shield hung with bells, and he performed a sword dance 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



[ 105—1063 


78 The Malay Annals 

(on the ground) before the Batara of Majapahit. When bidden 
by the Batara to come up into the hall of audience he did so 
and performed variousf 277 sword dances there, in the course of 
which he brandished his shield several times at the dog. The 
dog (took fright,) strained at the chain until it broke and then 
ran away into the forest. After that they never again tied a 
dog there. 

Adjoining the gallery of the audience hall there was a pavilion 
reserved for the ladies of the court. Anyone else entering this 
pavilion would be speared by the Javanese and consequently no 
one dared to enter it. But said Hang Jebat and (? to) Hang 
Kasturi, “Let us try and get into this pavilion (andf 278 see if they 
can turn us out) !” Hang Kasturi agreed, so one day when the 
Batara of Majapahit was giving an audience and the princes and 
chiefs were all assembled, Hang Jebat and Hang Kasturi went into 
the pavillion. When the Javanese saw this, they came and 
thrust at them with their spears: and so many were the 
spears that the faces of Hang Jebat and Hang Kasturi could 
hardly be seen. But Hang Jebat and Hang Kasturi drew 
their creeses and with them they cutf 279 the Javanese spears 
in half, so that not one of them took effect and the spear¬ 
heads that were picked up afterwards J weighed many a 
catty. And there arose a greatf 280 outcry and the Batara of 
Majapahit inquired what was the cause of it. And when he 
was told of the doings of Hang Jebat and Hang Kasturi, he said, 
“Let them sit in the pavilion and do not forbid them!" When 
the Javanese heard the words of the Batara of Majapahit, they 
desisted and Hang Jebat and Hang Kasturi seated themselves in the 
pavilion. This happened each day; when the Batara of Maja¬ 
pahit gave an audience, Hang Jebat and Hang Kasturi sat in the 
pavilion. Now as for Hang Tuah, wherever he went he caused 
a sensation, so struck were the people by his bearing. If he 
entered the gallery of the audience hall, there was excitement 
in the gallery. If he went to the marketf 281 , there was excitement 
in the market (and if he went to a village, there was excitement 
in the village): and the Javanese were astonished to see now he 
bore himself. [As for the Javanese maidens, if he walked through 
the market or wheresoever he went, many were those that fell 
in love with Hang Tuah]. And if Hang Tuah passed, married 
women tore themselves from the embraces of their husbands 
so that they could go out and seef 282 him. Hence the Javanese 
sang 

Onya suruhf 283 tanggapana penglipur; saben dina katon paran- 

dene onang uga 

which means “Here is sireh; take it to allay the pangs of a 
whole day s. love — but you will still yearn for him! 

Journal Malayan Branch (iVol. XXV. Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



translated -by C. G, Brown 79 


[106—107] Tvver sang dara kabeh, dene Laksamana luinaku-lumaku, 

penjurit latu Malayu 

which means:— “wives and maidens alike were all a-flutter at 
the sight of the Laksamana, the Raja of Malaka’s war-chief, pass¬ 
ing by' 


Ayu-ayu anake wong pande wesi; paran tan ayua, saben dina 
den-g urinda 


which means:— “Passing fair is the daughter of the smith, and 
well she may be fair, she is for ever seeking. ...?” 


Kaget wong peken, dene Laksamana tumandang, Laksamana 
tumandang, penjurit ratu ing seberang 


which means:— “wives in the embrace of their husbands were 
startled (and leapt up) because they saw the Laksamana appro¬ 
aching, the Laksamana war-chief of the Raja across the sea” 


Tututana! yen ketemu, patenana karo, ketelu jaruman mara 
which means:— “Pursue him (the Laksamana) and when you 
find him (with your wife) kill the pair of them and the go- 
between as well” 

Geger wong pasar dene Laksamana teka, Laksamana penjurit 
Ratu Malaka 

which means:— “What excitement there was in the market 
when the Laksamana, the Raja of Malaka’s war-chief, approached” 

Wis laliya kung (lagi) kungku maning: sumbali-nya lipur kung 
had saben gelak kung 

which means:— “Even if for the moment I have forgotten my 
love, in a trice back comes the yearning: though I pretend to 
make light of my passion, the longing ever possesses my heart” 

Geger wong paseban dene Laksamana liwat, Laksamana liwat 
penjurit Ratu Malaka 

which means:— “What excitement there was in the hall of 
audience on account of (?at the sight of) the Laksamana, war- 
chief of the Raja of Malaka” 


Den-urai rambut, den-tangm; rambute milu tan di-remen 
which means:— “they unloosed their hair and^ wept, saying, 
'Why, even my hair would follow his beauty (?)” 

Such was the passion of the women in Majapahit for the 
Laksamana: and the young men of the place amongst themselves 
made up this verse:— 

Tidk embun didaun dasun 
Mapanchuran didaun bira (h) 

Saben dina amboi katon 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 




80 


The Malay Annals 

[ 107 — 108 ] Uru edan rasa manira 

Basah mandi dipapan 
Mandi dipapan malu manira 
I sin lara amboi mapan 
Bi/er mangisnya tangen in g sir a 

(the dew falls on the onion leaves, as water trickles on to the 
leaves of the birah. Every day alas! he is seen and I feel the 
madness of love. Bathe on the board and you get wet. I am 
loth to bathe on the board. I am shy to seek lodgment (in his 
heart), I can only weqp with longing for him. 

The Laksamana had at that time no peer, save only Sangka 
Ningrat, war-chief of the Raja of Daha, who alone could rival 
him to some extent. Hence the Javanese sang 

Geger wong ing panggungan, dene Sangkaningrat teka 

which means:— '‘Great was the excitement among the specta¬ 
tors at the sight of Sangka Ningrat approaching, Sangka Ningrat 
war-chief of the Raja of Daha.” 

Thus was the behaviour of the men of Malaka who had 
gone to Majapahit, each according to his fashion (?). And when 
the Batara of Majapahit perceived how clever Sultan Mansur Shah 
was and how he excelled all other princes in everything that he 
•did, and how well-bred and sharp-witted were his followers, he 
thought to himself, “I shall do well to have this Sultan Mansur 
Shah for a son-in-law and marry him with my daughter Radin 
Galoh Chendera Kirana.” Thereupon he ordered! 284 that there 
should be feasting for forty days and forty nights. And the 
music of every sort of instrument was heard, and solemn and 
awe-inspiring was the sound of the music—gongs, drums, clario¬ 
nets, trumpets, kettledrums.and the noise thereof was unima¬ 

ginable. Many and varied were the performances—dancing on 
the flat of the foot (?), Sundanese dancing, Javanese dancing, 

dancing to the serama, shadow-plays,.. rakat plays, chanting 

(?), singing of romances,.each man giving the performance 

in which he was skilled, to the delight of the dense masses of 
onlookers. 

And the Batara of Majapahit spoke to the Raja of Malaka, 
saying, “These Javanese here have played for us, each according 
to his fashion. It is the men of Malaka who have done nothing!” 
And Sultan Mansur Shah said to Tun Bijaya Sura, “The Batara 
of Majapahit bids me order the men of Malaka to play for him.” 
But Tun Bijaya Sura answered, “The only game we Malays 
know is sapu-sapuf 285 ring in.” When Sultan Mansur Shah told 
the Batara of Majapahit what Tun Bijaya Sura had said, the Batara 
Teplied, “What isr sapu-sapu ringin like? Tell Tun Bijaya Sura 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV. Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 






translated by C. C. Brown 81 

[ 108 — 109 ] to play, Radin Galoh would like to see it.” Tun Bijaya Sura then 
chose out fourteen or fifteen men of good family and brought 
them forward to play. Advancing (? stretching! 285 * out their legs) 
towards the Batara of Majapahit with their sarongs rolled up to 
their knees they began to play sapu ringin. But when the Javanese 

saw this, they forbade them, saying,."I will give you such 

a clout as will destroy you, stretching out your legs before the 
Batara!”! 280 To which Tun Bijaya oura replied, “We are only 
playing because we were commanded by the Batara to play! Had 
we not been so commanded, are we madmen (that we should play 
of our own accord)?! 287 But if you say we are not to, then we play 
no more!” And the Batara said, “Never mind, let them play and 
don't forbid them.” So they went on with the game: and when it 
was over, Tun Bijaya Sura and the other players were given robes 
of honour. And the Batara observed, “These men of Malaka are 
far sharper than those of any other country! No one would stand 
a chance with them at any game!” 

And the Batara of Majapahit sent for a certain ruffian who 
had no rival in trickery and said to him, “Steal me the creese of 
Tun Bijaya Sura! He's a very sharp fellow, I can see.” And the 
ruffian replied, “How can your humble servant do that? Malays 
wear their creeses in front. If they wore their creeses behind, 

I could steal it.” “Very well”, said the Batara, “I will tell them 
to wear their creeses behind.” So the following day, when the 
Batara was giving an audience and all the princes (including 
Sultanf 288 Mansur Shah) were in attendance, the Batara said to 
Tun Bijaya Sura, “Do you know how to dress in the Javanese 
fashion, Tun Bijaya Sura?” And Tun Bijaya answered, “If it 
please your Highness, even if I do not know how to, I can be 
taught and then do as I have been taught!” The Batara then 
ordered robes of honour in the Javanese style to be prepared, and 
Tun Bijaya Sura dressed himself in the Javanese style, with his 
creese behind. The Batara then left the audience hall to go and 
see the cock-fighting. The excitement was intense and the shouts 
of the backers rose to high heaven. In the confusion that reigned 
the ruffian succeeded in stealing Tun Bijaya Sura's creese. Tun 
Bijaya Sura looked behind him and perceiving that his creese was 
gone he said, “(Alas!) I've been robbed by these Javanese!” 
Thereupon he edged up to the Batara's betel-bearer and contrived 
to filch from him the Batara's! 289 creese, which he then put on. 
When the cock-fighting was over and the Batara was seated 
in the hall of audience, and all were present, each seated in his 
appropriate place, the Batara concealed Tun Bijaya Sura s creese 
under his thigh (and then called! 290 him) saying, “Come here, 
Tun Bijaya Sura.” And when Tun Bijaya Sura had taken his 
seat at the Batara's feet, the Batara took Tun Bijaya Sura s creese 
from under his thigh and shewed it to him, saying, We have 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 




[ 109 — 110 ] 


82 The Malay Annals 

just obtained a Creese of very fine workmanship. Have you ever 
seen one like this. Tun Bijaya Sura?” And when Tun Bijaya Sura 
saw the creese, he recognized it as his own: whereupon he drew 
the creese he had at his waist and said to the Batara, "Which is 
the better, (your Highness), that creese or this one of your 
humble servant's?” And when the Batara saw the creese which 
Tun Bijaya Sura had, he recognized it, for it is the custom of 
the Rajas of Java that royal creeses should have certain fittings: 
moreover the man who boref 290a the creese was present. And the 
Batara said, "This Bijaya Sura is altogether too sharp, we cannot 
trick him!”: and he returned Tun Bijaya Sura's creese to him 
and at the same time gave him his own as a present. 

And when the forty days and forty nights' festivities were 
accomplished and the propitious moment had arrived, Sultan 
Mansur Shah was married to Radin Galoh. After the wedding 
they went into the bridal chamber. And Sultan Mansur Shan 
and Radin Galoh were deeply enamoured of each other: while 
such was the Batara's affection for Sultan Mansur Shah that he 
made him sit side by side with him whenever he gave audiences 
and would not take a repast without him. 

After Sultan Mansur Shah had been some while at Majapahit, 
he wished to return to Malaka; and he sought permission of the 
Batara to do so, taking Radin Galoh with him. The Batara 
consented and Sultan Mansur Shah gave orders for his ships 
to be made ready. And when they were ready, Sultan Mansur 
Shah bade Tun Bijaya Sura ask thef 290b Batara of Majapahit to 
grant him Indragiri. Tun Bijaya Sura therefore presented himself 
before the Batara and said, "Your Highness, your son lays his 
homage at your Highness' feet. He wishes to ask for Indragiri. 
If it is given, wellf 291 and good: if it is not given, that too is 
well.” The Batara then said to his chiefs, "What think you? 
Our son asks for Indragiri.” And they answered, "It would be 
well for your Highness to bestow it upon him, to prevent any 
discord arising with him.” The Batara then said to Tun Bijaya 
Sura, "So be it, we bestowf 292 Indragiri upon our son: for, as I 
see it, to whom but to my son, the Raja of Malaka, does the 
whole realm of Java belong, let alonef 923 Indragiri?” Tun Bijaya 
Sura then took his leaye and returned to Sultan Mansur Shah to 
whom he related all that had passed. Sultan Mansur Shah was 
delighted, and he told Hang Tuah to ask for Siantan. Hang 
Tuah accordingly presented himself before the king to ask for 
Siantan and he said, "Your Highness, your humble servant begs 
to ask for Siantan. If it is graciously granted to him, so be 
it: if it is not, so be it.” To which the Batara replied, "Very 
well, you shall have it. Even if you had asked for Palembang, 
Laksamana, I would assuredly have given it to you, let alone 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV. Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



83 


translated by G. C. Brown 

[ill—112] Siantan/’ Thus it was that Siantan became the territory 
of the Laksamana, for himself and those that came after him. 
After that Sultan Mansur Shah set forth on his return to Malaka, 
where he arrived in due course. And when he was come to Ulu 
Sepantai (?), the Bendahara, the Treasurer and the chiefs, greater 
and lesser, came to welcome Sultan Mansur Shah, bringing with 
them the state drums, pipes and trumpets, and the regalia: and 
their ships looked to be more in number than any man could 
count. And when they met Sultan Mansur Shah, all the chiefs, 
greater and lesser, did homage to him. Then when they arrived 
at the city of Malaka, he proceeded to the palace in company 
with Radin Galoh Chendera Kirana. And Sultan Mansur Shah 
gave his eldest daughter, Princess Bakal, in marriage to Maharaja 
Merlang of Indragiri; and it was from that marriage that Raja 
Nara Singa, who subsequently becamef 294 Sultan ‘Abdu 1-Jalil, was 
born. And after a while Sultan Mansur Shah had a son by Radin 
Galoh Chendera Kirana and gave him the name of Ratuf 295 di- 
Klang. 

Now it happened one day that the horse which Sultan Mansur 
Shah himself was wont to ride fell into the cesspool, but though 
people quickly foregathered to get the horse up out of the cesspool, 
no one would volunteer to go down f 296 and make a rope fast to it. 
When Hang Tuah saw what had happened, he plunged forthwith 
into the cesspool and secured a rope to the neck of the horse, 
which was then hauledf 297 up. And when the horse was up, then 
Hang Tuah himself came up, after which he went and cleansed 
himself. And when Sultan Mansur Shah saw that his horse was 
up again out of the cesspool, he was delighted; and Hang Tuah 
was highly commended by him and presented with robes of 
honour as befitted his rank. 

Not long after that it happened that a certain Javanese hadf 298 
fever, and (when he had fits of shivering) the young men all 
laughed at him. Resenting their behaviour the Javanese ran 
amuck with a Sunda knife and slew people right and left. No one 
would stand up to him and there was a panic, everyone running 
this way and that. Hang Tuah came forthwith and the Javanese, 
whenf 299 he saw Hang Tuah approaching, made for him. Hang 
Tuah pretended to retreat and dropped his creese. When the 
Javanese saw this he threw away his knife and picked up Hang 
Tuah’s creese, thinking to himself “this is a good creese , (as 
indeed it was bound to be) for Hang Tuah was a wonderful judge 
of creeses. But when Hang Tuah perceived that the Javanese 
had thrown away his knife, he seized it and set on the Javanese, 
who stabbed at him with his creese. Hang Tuah however made 
a spring,and avoided the stab-.then he in his turn stabbed at the 
Javanese Iwith the Sunda knife and. transfixed him below the 

T9 52 } r RpyaI Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



84 


The Malay Annals 


[ 112 — 113 ] breast, so that he died. Word was brought forthwith to Sultan 
Mansur Shah that the Javanese had been killed by Hang Tuah. 
Sultan Mansur Shah then sent for Hang Tuah and gave him robes 
of honour. 

When in due course Hang Tuah attained maturity, he hadf 300 
an intrigue with one of the palace women-attendants. On hear¬ 
ing of this Sultan Mansur Shah ordered the Sri Nara 'diraja to 
put himf 301 to death. But the Sri Nara 'diraja thinking that 
Hang Tuah had not yet committed any offence deserving of death 
had him hidden away in a country place and put in fetters. He 
then informed the Raja that Hang Tuah had been put to death, 
and Sultan Mansur Shah said not a word. 

A yearf 302 later Hang Kasturi had an intrigue with one of the 
palace women-attendents who was a concubine of the Raja. Sultan 
Mansur Shah and his royal consort thereupon left the palace 
where the girl was and moved to another: and Hang Kasturi was 
surrounded (in the vacant palace). Sultan Mansur Shah seated 
himself in a small pavilion, where the Bendahara, the Treasurer 
and all the chiefs, greater and lesser, presented themselves before 
him. But though the crowd surrounding (the palace where) Hang 
Kasturi (was) was massed deep, not a man could get into the 
palace to attack Hang Kasturi, for he had bolted the doors, leaving 
only one of them open in front of him. He had strewn the floor 
with trays,f 303 platters, salvers and trenchers, and it was onf 304 
those trays and platters that he moved hither and thither. He 
then killed! 305 his mistress, slitting her from her face to her waist, 
and stripped her naked. In vain did Sultan Mansur Shah order 
Hang Kasturi to be attacked, not a man would offer for the task, 
for at that time Hang Kasturi was a man clean* out of the ordinary. 
And Sultan Mansur Shah kept speakingf 306 of Hang Tuah, saying, 
"Alas that Hang Tuah is nof 307 more! If Tuah were alive, he 
could efface this shame that has been put upon me/' 

(The Sri Nara 'dirajaf 308 at first was silent when he heard 
what the Raja said, but) when the Raja mentioned Hang Tuah 
not once but several times, he at last said, "It seems to me, your 
Highness, that you sorely miss Hang Tuah. If by any chance 
Hang Tuah were still alive, would your Highness pardon him?" 
And the king answered, "Have you Hang Tuah in your keeping, 
Sri Nara 'diraja?" "Am If 309 mad", said the Sri Nara 'diraja' 
"that I should have him in my keeping? Your Highness bade me 
get rid of him and I have done so!" And Sultan Mansur Shah 
answered, "If Tuah were alive, I would pardon him though his 
offence was as great as (?the) Hillf 310 (? of Kaf)! I have a 
feeling that Tuah is alive and with you, Sri Nara 'diraja.” The 
Sri Nara 'diraja then said, "It is as you say, your Highness. 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV. Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



85 


translated by C. C. Brown 

[ 113 ] Whenf 310a your Highness bade me put Hang Tuah to death, it 
seemed to me that it was not fitting that he should be killed for 
what he had done, so If 311 put him in fetters, for Hang Tuah is no 
ordinary man and I fancied that he might some day be of use to 
your Highness/' And Sultan Mansur Shah was overjoyed at the 
words of the Sri Nara 'diraja and said," you are a servantf 312 who 
truly serves, Sri Nara 'diraja!” And he rewarded him with robes of 
honour as befitted his rank, and bade him send for Hang Tuah. 
The Sri Nara 'diraja accordingly ordered his men to go and 
fetchf 313 Hang Tuah, and they brought him into the presence of 
Sultan Mansur Shah. Hang Tuah's walk was that of a man not 
yet steady on his feet, he could only totterf 314 feebly, so long had 
he been in fetters. When he appeared! 315 , Sultan Mansur Shah 
took his own creese from his waist and handed it to him, saying, 
“Take this creese of mine and slay Kasturi.” And Hang Tuah 
replied, “Very well, your Highness”; and after doing obeisance 
to the Raja he set out for Hang Kasturi. And when he came to the 
stairway, Hang Tuah called out to Hang Kasturi to come down. 
And when Hang Kasturi beheld Hang Tuah, he said, “Sof 315a 
you are still alive! I thought you were dead orf 315b I should never 
have done what I have done! And now we are met,Just you! 31 * 
and I, creese to creese! Up here with you!” “Very well” 
answered Hang Tuah, but barely had he mounted two or three 
steps of the stairs when Hang Kasturi attacked him. Hang Tuah 
leapt down, and then tried once more to mount the stairs; but 
the same thing happened again. After this had happened two or 
three times, Hang Tuah said to Hang Kasturi, “How amt 317 
I to come up to you? No sooner have I mounted two or three 
steps than you attack me! If you're a man, come down here and 
we'll fight man to man, for all the world tof 318 see!” But Hang 
Kasturi replied, “Horn am I to come down to you, with all those 
people there? While I was fighting with you, who knows but 
someone else would come and stab me?” Then said Hang Tuah, 
“Not a man would I allow to help me, it would be just a fight 
between you and me!” But Hang Kasturi replied, Howf 319 could 
it be thus? If I come down, someone else will assuredly stab 
me. No, if you want my life, come up here and take 
it!” Then said Hang Tuah, “If you want me to come up to you, 
move back a bit!” Hang Kasturi agreed and moved back, where¬ 
upon Hang Tuah went up and seeing a small shield hanging on 
the wall of the palace he seized it. Then they fought, Hang 
Tuah and Hang Kasturi, but whereas Hang Tuah hadf 320 a 
shield, Hang Kasturi had not. And when Hang Tuan perceived 
that the Raja's concubine with whom Hang Kasturi had had an 
intrigue had been killed and stripped naked by Hang Kasturi, he 
contrived as he fought to twitch with his foot the woman s sarong 
so that it covered her as though a sheet had been laid over her. 
Poorf 321 Hang Tuah, fresh from being fettered, unsteady on his 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



86 


The Malay Annals 

1114 ] feet and using his creese like a man who had lostf 322 the knack! 
He stabbed at Hang Kasturi but stabbed the wall instead and his 
creese stuck there. When Hang Kasturi would have stabbed him 
Hang Tuah cried out "Does a man who is a man stab another 
like that? If you are a man, let me free my creese!” "Free it 
then”, said Hang Kasturi. So Hang Tuah freed his creese and 
set it to rights. When this was done, the fight was resumed, but 
once again Hang Tuah missed Hang Kasturi and this time he 
stabbed a pillar. Again Hang Kasturi bade him free his creese, 
and Hang Tuah freed it and stabbed at Hang Kasturi. This 
happened two or three times, Hang Tuah getting his creese 
stuck in wall or pillar and Hang Kasturi bidding him free it. 
Presently! 323 by the will of God it was Hang Kasturi’s turn to 
stab the wall so that his creese stuck fast in it. Forthwith Hang 
Tuah stabbed him through the back to the heart, whereupon 
Hang Kasturi cried, "Does a man who is a man go back on his 
word like that, Tuah? When your creese was stuck two or 
three times, I told you to free it, but the first time I get mine 
stuck, you stab me!” To which Hang Tuah replied, "Who need 
play fair with you, you who have been guilty of high treason?” 
and he stabbed Hang Kasturi a second time and killed him. 

Whenf 324 Hang Kasturi was dead, (Hang Tuah left the 
palace and presented himself before Sultan Mansur Shah, and) 
Sultan Mansur Shah was so well pleased that he bestowed upon 
Hang Tuah the very clothes! 325 that he himself wore. And the 
corpse of Hang Kasturi was dragged away and cast into the sea. 
His wife! 326 and children were (put to death), (and his house) 
was pulled down: even the ground in which its uprights stood 
was dug up and cast into the sea. Hang Tuah was then install¬ 
ed as Laksamana and was borne in procession as is the custom 
for princes: and he was given a place (in the hall of audience) on 
a level with the Sri Nara ‘diraja. Hang Tuah was the first 
Laksamana, and when the Srif 327 Nara (? Bija) ‘diraja was absent 
it was the Laksamana who acted for him as bearer of the sword 
of state, for it was the customf 328 of ancient times for the Sri 
Bija ‘diraja to bear the sword of state, his position being in the 
gallery. That is the procedure that has been followed down to 
the present day. 

Now as Sultan Mansur Shah refused to live any longer in 
the palace where Hang Kasturi was killed, he commanded Benda- 
hara Paduka Raja to have a new palace built. The Bendahara 
himself superintended! 329 the work, as by custom Ben tan was 
the Bendaharas fief. The palace! 329 * had seventeen bays each 
interspace between the pillars being eighteen feet with pillars in 
circumference the span of a manV arms; the. roof had seven tiers 

’■'Scorodocarpus bomgensis Becc. 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 




87 


translated by C. C. Brown 

[ 114 — 115 ] (? with sevenf pinnacles). Between were Cupolas, arid everyf 
cupola was furnished with a dormer-window, its roof at right 
angles and terminating in flyingf crockets, all of them carved. 
Between the spires was trellis-work with pendent and pyramidal 
decoration. All the spires were gilded and their tops were of red 
glass, so that in sunlight they gleamed like fire. All the walls had 
eaves and inset were large Chinese mirrors that flashed in the sun 
like lightning dazzling the sight. The cross-beams were of kulim* 
a cubit in width and nine inches thick; the door-sills were two 
cubits wide, a cubit thick; and curved; the cross-bars were forty 
in number and all of them were gilded. So fine was the workr 
manship of this palace that not another royal palace in the world 
at that time could compare with it. It was given the name of 
mahligai, and its roof was of copper and zinc shingles. 

And when the palace was nearly finished, Sultan Mansur Shall 
went to look at it, and he walked through the interior while his~ 
servants walked underneath thef 330 building. And Sultan Mansur 
Shah found the workmanship of the palace to his liking, but when 
he passed on to the kitchens he noticed! 331 that one of the cross¬ 
beams was dark in colour and undersized, and he asked what it 
was made of. On receiving from the princes (?f 331a servants) the 
reply that it was made of ibul, he observed, “It looks as though 
the Bendahara was in rather a hurry”: and he then went home 
accompanied by Tun Indra Segara [who was by descent a sida- 
sidaf 331b ]. Tun Indra Segara then went and informed the Benda¬ 
hara, saying, “The Ruler shewed displeasure just now because one 
of the cross-beams was undersized.” When the Bendahara heard 
what Tun Indra Segara said, he gave orders there and then for a 
cross-beam of kulim to be procured, a cubit in width and a finger- 
spanf 332 in thickness. The cross-beam was immediately procured 
and Bendahara Paduka Raja himself went to the kitchen of the 
palace, shaped the beam and put it into place. And the sound of 
the work that was being done reached the ears of Sultan Mansur 
Shah and he asked, “What is that noise? And Tun Indra Segara 
answered, “It is your servant the Bendahara, your Highness: he 
is replacing the cross-beam that was too small just now: the 
Bendahara himself is shaping the new beam and putting it into 
place.” Sultan Mansur Shah then ordered robes of honour, 
complete in all particulars, to be brought for the Bendahara. 
[Now Tun Indra Segara was known as Shahmura] And the palace 
was completed: and all those who had been engaged on the con¬ 
struction were given robes of honour by Sultan Mansur Shah, 
who then moved to the new Mahligai (as it was called?). 

And after some while, by the will of Almighty God, the 
mahligai caught fire and flames suddenly appeared on the roof. 
Sultan Mansur Shah with his consort and the women-attendants 

*Orania Macrocladus. 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 




88 


The Malay Annals 


£H5_116] 


fled from the palace, leaving the Raja’s possessions in the palace 
(?) f332a. wi e ff or ts to deal with the fire were in vain and 
steps were then taken to remove to safety all the property in the 
palace, but the zinc of the roof began to melt and streamed down 
from the roof-gutters like a heavy downpour of rain, and it was 
because of this stream of molten zinc that those who were 
endeavouring to rescue the property were scared (?). One of 
those who went into the palace to remove the property to safety 
was Tun Muhammad “the Nimble”; while other people went in 
once for that purpose, he had gone in and come out two or three 
tmes. That was why he was given the name of Tun Muhammad 
the Nimble. As for Tun Muhammad “the Camel”, he had only 
to go into the palace once to come out with as much as two or 
three other men carried between them: henre he was given the 
name of Tun Mohammad the Camel. Of the property in the 
palace all but a little was removed to safety, but the building was 
entirely gutted before the fire was extinguished. And Sultan 
Mansur Shah rewarded the court staff who had saved the property. 
Those eligible for robes of honour received robes of honour. 
Those eligible for creese f 333 with gold-plated sheaths received 
such creeses; those eligible for (? gold-mounted) swords received 
such swords; and those eligible for titles were given titles. Sultan 
Mansur Shah then commanded Bendahara Paduka Raja to have 
another palace and audience-hall built, and the Bendahara called 
out men to build themf 334 . The men of Ungaran (and the men 
of Tugal?) built the palace and with them were the men of 
Bentan Karangan who collected the materials for it, while the men 
of Panchur Sera pong built the audience-hall (? and with them 
were) the men of Buru. The pavilion was built by the men of 
Suir, the waiting room on the right by the men of Sudar, while 
that on the left was built by the men of Sayong: the drum-hall (?) 
was built by the men of Apong and the out-houses (ga/ah 
menyusu ) by the men of Merba: the bathing-place was made by 
the men of Tungkal, the mosque was built by the men of Tentai, 
the gate of the palace domain by the men of Muda and the fort 

by the men of. (This palace,even surpassed its predecessor. 

And when all was completed, Sultan Mansur Shah rewarded those 
who had worked on it, and he took up his abode in the new 
palace permanently). 

Now the Sri Nara 'diraja had several childrenf 335 by Tun 
Kudu; (the eldest) a son called Tun Tahirf 330 , the second a 
daughter called Tun Shah and the youngest a son called Tun 
Mutahirf 337 who was very good-looking. And when Tun Kudu 
returned to the Mercy of God, exchanging this perishable world 
for a world that abideth, the Sri Nara 'diraja married again. His 
new wife was a Malay girl, and by her he had two children; a son 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 




89 


translated by C. C. Brown 

[116 — 117] called Tun 'Abdul, who was a greatf 338 fop, and a daughter called 
Tun Naja.f 339 

When news reached China of the greatness of the Raja of 
Malaka, the Raja of China sent envoys to Malaka: and as 
a complimentary giftf 340 to accompany his letter he sent needles, 
a whole shipload of them. And when the envoys reached Malaka, 
the king ordered the letter to be fetched from the ship with due 
ceremony and borne in procession. And when it had been 
brought into the palace it was received by a herald and given 
by him to the reader of the mosque, who read it out. It ran as 
follows:—"This letter from His Majesty the Raja of Heaven is 
sent to the Raja of Malaka. We hear that the Raja of 
Malaka is a great raja and we desire accordingly to be on terms 
of amity with the Raja of Malaka. Of a truth there are no rajas 
in this world greater than ourselves, and there is no one who 
knoweth the number of our subjects. We have asked for one 
needle from each house in our realm and those are the needles 
with which the ship we send to Malaka is laden/' 

When Sultan Mansur Shah heard how the letter ran he 
smiled. He then gave orders that the ship should be cleared of 
the needles and filled with fried sago. Tun Perpateh Puteh, 
younger brother of Bendahara Paduka Raja, was then commanded 
by Sultan Mansur Shah to go as envoy to China. He set out and 
after a voyage of some length arrived at his destination. The 
Raja of China ordered the Malaka letter to be borne in procession, 
but the procession was halted at the house of the chief minister, 
whose name was Ling Ho. Shortly before dawn Ling Ho and 
the chief notables went to the palace domain to present them¬ 
selves before the Raja of China, and Tun Perpateh Puteh accom¬ 
panied them. And (there came a vast flock of) crows t 341 which 
followed! 341 ” them in. When they arrived at the outer gate of the 
palace. Ling Ho and the notables who were with him stopped,, 
and the crows stopped also. The gong of summons then sounded 
and the whole party passed through the gate. This happened at 
each of the seven successive gates. And when it was day they 
entered the palace and took their seats in the hall of audience: 
and so many were those that were presenting themselves that they 
sat jammed knee to knee. And the crows spread their wings 
overshadowing those who were present. Thereupon was heard 
the rumble of thunderf 342 and the crash of thunder-claps, and 
forked lightning flashed, betokening the appearance of the Raja 
of China. Presently he appeared, faintly visible through the 
glass of the dragon’s mouth litter on which he was borne. There¬ 
upon all those present bowed their heads and lifted not their 
faces. The letter from Malaka was then read and the Raja of 
China was well pleased to hear what it said. And the sago was 
brought before the Raja of China, and he asked how it was made. 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



90 


The Malay Annals 

1117—118] And Tun Perpateh Puteh answered, “After this fashion, your High¬ 
ness: our Raja ordered that eachf 343 of his subjects should roll out 
a grain of sago until there were enough to fill a ship. That will 
indicate how many are the subjects of our Raja, no man knows 
their number!" Then said the Raja of China, “Great indeed must 
be this Raja of Malaka! The multitude of his subjects must be 
as the multitude of our own. It would be well that I should 
marry him with my daughter!" And turning to Ling Ho the 
Raja of China said, “If even the Raja of Malaka can order his 
subjects to do such work as rolling out grains of sago, by how 
muchf 344 the more can I! In future all rice for my eating is to be 
busked grain by grain, there is to be no more pounding." And 
Ling Ho replied, “Very well"; and that is why to this day the 
Raja of China eats no pounded rice but only rice that has been 
husked grain by grain. 

Now when Tun Perpateh Puteh presented himself before the 
Raja, he wore rings on each of his fingers, and when any f 345 
Chinese minister riveted his eyes on the rings, Tun Perpateh Puteh 
would give him one of them; and the same to the next one who 
gazed at them: and so on day after day whenever he presented 
himself before the Raja. 

One day the Raja of China asked Tun Perpateh Puteh what 
food Malays liked. And Tun Perpateh Puteh answered, “Your 
Highness, we like kangkong*, not cut across but split lengthways." 
The Raja of China accordingly ordered kangkong to be provided 
as Tun Perpateh Puteh had described. And when it had been 
cooked it was served! 340 to Tun Perpateh Puteh. And he and 
the other Malays ate of it, holding the kangkong in their fingers 
by the tip of the stalk and looking upwards, so that Tun Perpateh 
and the other Malays had a full view of the Raja of China. 

And when the season of the year for the return voyage to 
Malaka was come, the Raja of China bade Ling Ho make ready 
ships to convey Lingf 347 , his daughter, to Malaka. Ling Ho 
-did so, and when the ships were nearly ready, the Raja of China 
chose out five hundred youths of noble birth (? sons of minis¬ 
ters) f 348 with a high officer in command, to escortf 349 his daughter 
(Princess Hang Liu; and several hundred beautiful women- 
attendants accompanied her) And when the ships were ready. 
Tun Perpateh Puteh (sought the Raja's leave to return to Malaka 
&nd the (Raja's) letter was borne in procession to the ship. Tun 
Perpateh then) set sail for Malaka, which he reached after a 
voyage of some length. Word was brought to Sultan Maiisur 
Shah that Tun Perpateh P uteh had arrived, bringing with him 

*Ipomoea aquatics, -commonly used as a spinach” (W.). 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II fr ill 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 




[1 IS—119] 


translated by C. C. Brown 91 

a daughter of the Raja of China. Sultan Mansur Shah was well 
pleased and gave ordersf 349a to his chiefs and war chiefs to welcome- 
her. And when they had met the party, they brought the Princess 
into the palace with every mark of honour and distinction. And 
when she appeared, Sultan Mansur Shah was astonished by the 
beautyf 349b of Princess Hang Liu, daughter of the Raja of China, 
and he gave orders that she embrace the faith of Islam. When this 
had been done, Sultan Mansur Shah married the princess, daughter 
of the Raja of China: and by her he had a son to whom he gave 
the name of Paduka Mimat. [This Paduka Mimat had a son 
named Paduka Sri China, who in his turn had a son named 
Paduka Ahmat, father of Paduka Isap]. And the five hundred 
(? sons of) Chinese ministers! 350 were bidden to take up their 
abode at Bukit China: and the place goes by that name to this day. 

It was they who made the well at Bukit China, and it is their 
descendants who are called "the Chinese yeomen”. And Sultan 
Mansur gave robes of honour to the Chinese minister! 351 who had 
brought the princess, and the minister then sought leave to 
return to China. 

The king thereupon commanded Tun Telanaif 352 and Mentri 
Jana Putra to go (as envoys) to China, for now for the first time 
Sultan Mansur Shah was sending obeisance' to the Raja of China, 
having married his daughter. Tun Telanai and Mentri Jana 
Putra accordingly sailed for China, but by the will of God a great 
storm arose and they were driven off their course and fetched up 
at Brunai. They presented themselves before the Raja of Brunai, 
who asked, “How is the letter from our father, the Raja of Malaka, 
to the Raja of China worded?” And Tun Telanai replied, “The 
servant, Raja of Malaka,'s obeisance to His Majesty the Ra;a of 
China.” “Oh”, said the Raja of Brunai, “so the Raja of Malaka 
sends obeisance to the Raja of China?” And Mentri Jana Putra 
answered, “Not so, your Highness. The meaning of the word 
sahaya in Malay is “servant”, and the senders of obeisance are we, 
the servants of the Raja of Malaka, not your Highness father,, 
the Raja of Malaka himself!” And the Raja of Brunai was silent.. 

And when the season of the year for the return voyage was/ 
come, Tun Telanai and Mentri Jana Putra sought leave to return 
to Malaka. And the Raja of Brunai sent with them a letter to- 
Malaka, which was worded as follows:— Your Highness son 
sends obeisance to his royal father.” Tun Telanai and Mentri 
Jana Putra then returned to Malaka and after presenting to Sultan 
Mansur Shah the letter from the Raja of Brunai, they told him all 
that had happened. And the king was well pleased to hear what 
they had to tell, and bestowed robes of honour upon Tun Telanai 
and Mentri Jana Putra, with a special word of commendation for 
Mentri Jana Putra. 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



92 


The Malay Annals 

[lid—120] And Sultan Mansur Shah ordered Bendahara Paduka Raja 

to invadef 354 Pahang. The Bendahara set out accordingly, 
accompanied by Tun Bijaya 'diraja, the Laksamana, Sang Stia, 
Sang Guna, Sang Nyaya (? Naya), Sang Jaya Pekerma and the 
war-chiefs with a fleet of two hundred sail, great and small. When 
they reached Pahang after a voyage of some days the men of 
Malaka fought with the men of Pahang. [Pahang in former days 
was a great state subject to Siam; it was ruled by one Maharaja 
Sura, who was a cousin of Lord Bubunnya] When the Benda¬ 
hara reached Pahang, the men of Pahang fought with the men of 
Malaka in a fierce battle. After the fighting had lasted! 355 some 
while, then by the will of Almighty God Who subjecteth all His 
servants to His power, Pahang was easily defeated, the men of 
Pahang fled, and Maharaja Sura escaped to the upper reaches of 
the river. The Bendahara ordered the Sri Bijaya (Bija) 'diraja, 
the Laksamana, Sri Akar Raja, Sang Stia, Sang Guna, Sang Naya, 
Sang Jaya Pekerma, Sang Surana, Sang Aria, Sang Radin, Sang 
Sura Pahlawan, Sang Sura and the war-chiefs to pursue Maharaja 
Sura. 

Now the Sri Bija 'diraja combined! 350 this pursuit of Maharaja 
Sura with the pleasure of hunting wild buffaloes and snaring jungle 
fowl, stopping to snare jungle fowl at every good stretch of river 
sand that he came to. So much so that his followers said, "What 
means this, sir? We seem to be engaged on a different business 
from the others! They are pursuing Maharaja Sura in good 
earnest, while you, sir, just go on amusing yourself with your sport! 
If they come up with Maharaja Sura, it is they who will acquire 
merit and we shall acquire nothing!” But the Sri Bija 'diraja 
replied, "How do you young men know? Maharaja Sura is not 
going to escape me! In the number! 357 tables his name is below 
mine, his day is below my day and his time is below my time. 
How then can he escape from my clutches?” 

Now Maharaja Sura had been three nights in the forest with¬ 
out food and without drink. At last he came to an old woman's 
house and he asked her for rice! 358 'for Maharaja Sura'. And the 
old woman thought to herself, "Now I've heard that this Raja is 
being pursued by the Sri Bija 'diraja. Iff 359 it becomes known 
that I am sheltering him in my house, what will happen to me? 
I had better therefore go and inform the Sri Bija 'diraja.” So she 
said to Sri Maharaja Sura, "May your Highness be pleased to sit 
down while I go and get vegetables.” She then set off for the 
shore, meaning to inform those who were engaged in the pursuit: 
but all had gone on ahead except only the Sri Bija 'diraja who 
was still behind. So the old woman went to the Sri Bija 'diraja 
and told him what had happened. The Sri Bija 'diraja then 
ordered his men ashore to surround the house where Maharaja 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



93 


translated by C. C. Brown 

[120—121] $ ura W as and they seized him and brought him to the Sri Bija 
'diraja, who thereupon went back to the Bendahara taking Maha¬ 
raja Sura with him; but although he had arrested him the Sri Bija 
'diraja did not put Maharaja Sura in fetters or bind him. When 
they reached the Bendahara, the Sri Bija 'diraja handed Maharaja 
Sura over to him and the Bendahara kept him as the Sri Bija 
'diraja had kept him, treating him as a ruling prince. And the 
Bendahara ordered that Ya di-kenyang, the Maharaja Sura's riding 
elephant should be taken to Malaka: and when all the men who 
had been engaged in the pursuit had reassembled, Bendahara 
Paduka Raja returned to Malaka, taking Maharaja Sura with him. 

And when after a voyage of some length Bendahara Paduka 
Raja arrived at Malaka, he went into the palace and presented 
himself before Sultan Mansur Shah, with Maharaja Sura. And 
Sultan Mansur Shah was well pleased and he bestowed upon 
Bendahara Paduka Raja robes of honour of the greatest distinction: 
and all the war-chiefs who had gone on the expedition were also 
presented by the king with robes of honour. f 360 The Sri Bija 
'diraja (was then commanded by Sultan Mansur Shah to reside 
in Pahang and) was accorded the privilege of the drum of sover¬ 
eignty with clarionet and trumpet: only the kettledrums were 
witheld. And for his services in capturing Maharaja Sura he was 
granted (the special privilege) of a pair of fringed umbrellas 
carried side by side. (And he set forth for Pahang). When he 
was outsidef 361 the precincts of Malaka and had passed (Pulau 
Besar) he hadf 302 the drum of sovereignty beaten. On reaching 
Pahang he took up his abode there and it was he who ruled 
Pahang. 

As for Maharaja Sura, he was delivered by Sultan Mansur 
Shah to Bendahara Paduka Raja, still not in fetters. The Benda¬ 
hara then delivered him to the Sri Nara 'diraja, who imprisoned 
him in a cage one end of his public hall. But although he 
imprisoned him, he allowed him to have a mattress and a pillow: 
and when Maharaja Sura took food, it was brought to him on a 
dish, the man who brought it wore the shoulder-cloth and people 
were ordered to present themselves before him as before a ruler. 

One day when the Sri Nara 'diraja was seated in his hall and 
people were present, Maharaja Sura said, "When my country was 
defeated and I was taken prisoner by the Sri Bija 'diraja, I was 
treated as though I was still ruling my country. When I came 
to the Bendahara, it was thef 303 same thing (I felt I was being 
treated as a ruler). It is only now that I am with thisf 304 chief 
that I am put in a prison-cage!" To which the Sri Nara 'diraja 
replied, "You may be a prince, Maharaja Sura, but you are lacking 
in understanding! The Sri Bija 'diraja is a great war-chief. If 
he could subdue your whole kingdom, you by yourself would 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



94 


The Malay Annals 

[121—122] present little difficulty to him._ As for the Bendahara, he is a 
major chief and his retainers are many. How could you escape 
from his hands? But I — I am only a poor fakir, and if you 
were to escape, I should certainly incur the Ruler's displeasure. 
That is why you are imprisoned!" “Excellent!" said Maharaja 
Sura, “you are indeed a servant! 365 who truly seryes!" It happen¬ 
ed one day, after Maharaja Sura had been imprisoned for some 
while, that the elephant Ya Kenyang was led past the prison-cage 
on his way down to the river to be bathed. Sri Maharaja Sura 
called him and when the elephant came up to him, he examined 
him and perceived that one of his nails was missing. And he 
said, “To think that after all these years this is the first time I 
have looked at my own elephant like this'! No wonder I lost 
my country!" 

It happened once that Sultan Mansur Shah's riding elephant, 
Kenchinchi by name, escaped. In vain did Sri Rama, the Master 
of the King's Elephants, order search to be made, the elephant 
was not recovered. If he was seen in marsh or thicket, he defied 
capture. And the Sri Ramaf 366 said (“There is someone in this 
city who is deeply versed in the lore of elephants!") and he 
told Sultan Mansur Shah all that had happened. The king then 
ordered inquiry to be made throughout the city for anyone well 
versed in elephant lore. When he learnt that Maharaja Sura had 
such knowledge, he sent word to him asking him to recover his 
elephant. And Maharaja Sura said to the king's messenger, “My 
humble obeisance to the Ruler: set me free and I will recover the 
elephant." The messenger then went back and told Sultan 
Mansur Shah what Maharaja Sura had said, whereupon the king 
ordered his release. When Maharaja Sura had been released, the 
elephant wasf 366b recovered. Sultan Mansur Shah then ordered all 
the young men about the court to go to Maharaja Sura for inst¬ 
ruction, for it was the practice of Sultan Mansur Shah, when 
there was an expert with elephants or in horsemanship or in the 
handling of weapons, to send the young men about the court to 
him for lessons at his charges. [Now the Sri Rama was a 
cheteriaf 367 by descent; he had a seat in the right-hand gallery, 
and whoever brought sire h to him had to wear the shoulder-cloth] 

The Sri Nara 'diraja had a sister whom Sultan Mansur Shah 
had married. There were four children of this marriage, two sons 
and two daughters. (? One of the) sons was called Raja Ahmad. 
And the Sri Nara ‘diraja fell sick; and perceiving that he was 
about to die, he sent for Bendahara Paduka Raja and said to him, 
“From this sickness that I have upon me now I feel that I shall 
surely die. As for my children, they are but lads and lasses still and 
I commit them first to Almighty God and then to you, the 
moref 368 so because they are already your ‘children'. All that I have 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



translated by C. C. Brown 95 

[122—123] to bequeath is four chests of gold, each of them a load for fourt 3G8a 
men. All this I place in your control." The Sri Nara 'diraja then 
returned to the Mercy of God. And Sultan Mansur Shah came 
to the house to mourn the death of the Sri Nara 'diraja, and (for 
the funeral) he granted the privilege of umbrellas, drums, 
clarionet, trumpet and kettledrumsf 368b . The Sri Nara 'diraja was 
then buried and the king returned sorrowing to his palace.. The 
Sri Nara 'diraja's children then went to live with Bendahara 
Paduka Raja. One son, Tun Tahir, succeeded his father in the 
title of Sri Nara 'diraja and was made Treasurer, while a younger 
son, Tun Mutahir, was given the title of Sri Tahir Raja (sic: ? 
Sri Maharaja) and was made Temenggong. Another son of the 
Sri Nara 'diraja who was called Tun 'Abdul was by a different 
mother. This Tun 'Abdul was such a fop that he would take 
three days to trimf 309 his nails: he would only ride his horse in 
the shade, and over his dressing he would spend as much time 
as it takes to cook pot after pot of rice! Never was there such 
a fop. 


God alone knoweth the truth. 

Chapter X 

The sickness of the Raj& of China* its cause and cure. 

(Shellabeai, Chapter XV) 

Here now is a story of the Raja of China. When the envoys 
who had escorted the Raja of China's daughter together with Tun 
Perpateh to Malaka arrived back in China, the letter they brought 
from the Raja of Malaka was borne in procession, and when it 
reahed the hall of audience the Raja ordered his chief minister 
to read it. And when it had been interpreted to the Raja of 
China he was well pleased to hear that the Raja of Malaka sent 
'obeisance' to him. Hardly had this happened when the Raja of 
China fell sick and was stricken with a chloasma all over his body. 
He ordered that a doctor be sent for to treat the complaint, but 
though treatment was applied by the doctor the Raja was not 
cured: and though he sent for doctors by the hundred to treat him, 
there was still no cure. At last however an aged* doctor said to 
him, "May it please yourf 369a Highness, the disease from which you 
are suffering is beyond the powers of all of us to cure, because 
it is due to a specific cause." And when the Raja of China 
inquired what might be the cause, the aged doctor replied, "Your 
Highness, the cause is that the Raja of Malaka sent 'obeisance 
That, your Highness, is a judgment upon you. Your Highness 
must drink water used by the Raja of Malaka for washing his 
feet and you must bathe in that water, or this sickness that afflicts 
your Highness will not be cured." When the Raja of China heard 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 




96 


The Malay Annals 


[123—124] the words of the aged doctor, he ordered envoys to be sent to 
Malaka to ask for water that had been used for washing the feet 
of the Raja of Malaka. When the ships were ready, the envoys 
set forth for Malaka, where they arrived after a voyage of some 
length. And word was brought to Sultan Mansur Shah that 
envoys from the Raja of China were come to ask for water that 
had been used for washing the Ruler's feet. Sultan Mansur Shah 
then came out to the hall of audience and gave an audience, 
whereupon he gave orders for the letter from the Raja of China 
to be fetched from the ship with due ceremony and brought in 
procession to the audience hall. The king then ordered the 
reader of the mosque to read it. It ran as follows:— 'This 
letter comes from the royal father to his royal son. If the royal 
son f 3G9b wishes to do his royal father a great service, his royal father 
would ask as a favour for water that has been used for washing 
the feet of Sultan Mansur Shah." Sultan Mansur Shah gave the 
water forthwith, and he ordered that a letter be sent in return 
and that the Chinese envoys be given robes of honour. The 
letter and the water used for the washing of Sultan Mansur Shah's 
feet were then borne in procession to the envoys' ship and they 
then returned to China. When after a voyage of some length 
they arrived in China, the letter and the water used for washing 
the feet (of Sultan Mansur Shah) were borne in procession and 
taken into the palace. And the Raja of China drank of the water 
used for washing Sultan Mansur Shah's feet and bathed himself 
with it, and forthwith the chloasma disappeared entirely from the 
body of the Raja of China and he was cured. He then took an 
oath that never again would he except 'obeisance' from the 
Rajaf 369e of Ujong Tanah (and that oath holds good) to the 
present day. For the Raja of China said, "All ye who come after 
me, never demand 'obeisance' from the Raja of Malaka or those 
that come after him, but only friendship on equal terms." 

Chapter XI 

Sultan Mansur orders an attack on Siak because Siak will not 
admit the overlordship of Malacca. A follower of Raja Muham¬ 
mad, one of Sultan Mansur's sons, kills, Tun Besar, son of Bendahara 
Paduka Raja, for accidentally knocking off Raja Muhammad’s head¬ 
dress. Raja Muhammad is exiled to Pahang and made ruler there. 
The growing fame of Malaka. 

(Sheliabear, chapters XVII and XVIII) 

Here now is a story of how Sultan Mansur Shah decided to 
attack Siak because Siak, which was formerly a great kingdom 
ruled by descendants of the Raja of Pagar Ruyong, who himself 
Guntang Mahameru, refused to admit the overlordship of Malaka. 
It was for that reason that the king ordered the Sri Awadana to 
attack Siak: war-chiefs to the number of sixty were commanded 

Journal Malayan Branch IVol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



translated by C. C. Brown 97 

£124—125] to go on the expedition and Sang Jaya Pekerma and Sang Surana 
were commanded to accompany the Sri Awadana. [Now the Sri 
Awadana was a grandson of Bendahara Sri Amar 'diraja, for Sri 
Amar 'diraja had many children, of whom the eldest was Tun 
Hamzah, father of the Sri Awadana] Sri Awadana was chief 
minister to Sultan Mansur Shah. [He had two sons, the one 
named Tun Abu Saban, the other Tun Perak: Tun Abu Saban 
had a son, Orang Kaj r a Tun Hasan, while Tun Perak had a 
daughter called Tun Esah and a son named Tun Ahmad] The 
fief of the Sri Awadana was Merbau, which at that time had a 
fleet of thirty three-masted cruisers. When his ships were ready 
the Sri Awadana set forth, and Khoja Baba went with him together 
with the war-chiefs. 

And after some days they came to Siak. The Raja of Siak 
was called Maharaja Permaisura and his prime minister was 
called Tun Jana Muka Bebal. When they heard that the men 
of Malaka were coming, they made their preparations, manning 
the fort and calling out their forces. And the men of Malaka 
came up the river. Now the fort of Siak was on the water's 
edge. The men of Malaka brought their ships rightf 370 
alongside the fort, and they pouredf 371 arrows and spears into 
the fort like a torrent coursing down a hillside; and many of the 
'Siak troops were killed. Maharaja Permaisura stood on the fort 
and called upon his men to fight, but when Khoja Baba saw 
this, he drew his bow and shot him through the heart and 
Maharaja Permaisura fell dead. When the Siak men saw that 
their Raja had been slain, they broke and fled in disorder: 
whereupon the men of Malaka breached the fort, forced their 
way in and looted it, securing a vast amount of booty. 

And a son of Maharaja Permaisura, Megat Kudu by. name, was 
captured and brought to the Sri Awadana. The Sri Awadana 
then sailed for Malaka; and on arriving there he presented himself 
before the Raja, taking Megat Kudu with him. And Sultan 
Mansur Shah was well pleased and rewarded the Sri Awadana, 
Khoja Baba and all who went on the expedition with them. To 
Megat Kudu he gave robes of honour; and after marcying 
him to a daughter of his made him Raja of Siak with the title of 
Sultan Ibrahim, with Tun Tana Muka Bebal as prime minister 
as before. And Sultan Ibrahim had a son named Raja 'Abdul by 
his wife, the daughter of Sultan Mansur Shah. 

Here now is the storv of Raia Muhammad and (Raja) Ahmad, 
sons of Sultan Mansur Shah. When they had both grown up, it 
was the intention of Sultan Mansur Shah to put Raja Muhammad 
on the throne as his successor, for he was his favourite son. 
One day Raja Ahmad and Raja Muhammad were out riding: and 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society . 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



98 


The Malay Annals 

1125—126] it happened that at that moment Tun Besar, son of Bendahara 
Paduka Raja, was playing football (sepak raga) in the street with 
some other youths. As Raja Ahmad and Raja Muhammad rode 
past, Tun Besar had the ball and he kicked it so that it hit Raja 
Muhammad’s headcloth and knocked it off. And Raja Muhammad 
said, “My headcloth has fallen.” Thereupon the man who carried 
the betel-bowl rushed up and stabbed Tun Besar through the heart 
and killedf 872 him. Amid the excitement that ensued Bendahara 
Paduka Raja came out, and when he asked what the excitement 
was about, he was told, “Your son is dead, killed by Raja Muham¬ 
mad!” And when he learnt all that had happened, he asked, 
“Why this armingf 373 ?” And the Bendahara’s people replied, 
“We are going to avenge the death of our kinsman!” Then said 
the Bendahara, “You can’t be disloyalf 374 to the mound without 
being disloyal to the hill! Fort 375 shame, all of you, for shame! 
For it is the custom of Malays never to be disloyal to their masters. 
But as for having this prince as our master—never!” 

The Bendahara’s people then kept silent; and Tun Besar was 
buried. When Sultan Mansur Shah was informed of what had 
happened, he asked what the Bendahara had said: and he was 
told how the Bendahara had declared that it was the custom of 
Malays never to be disloyal but “as for having this prince as our 
master—never!” And Sultan Mansur was furious (with Raja 
Muhammad) and sent for him. When he appeared, Sultan 
Mansur’s anger was indescribable. “You young scoundrel”, he 
cried, “the only thing to be done with you is to turn you out 
of the country!” And he sent for the Sri Bija ‘diraja fromf 376, 
Pahang. When after some while the Sri Bija ‘diraja arrived, 
Sultan Mansur Shah handed Raja Muhammad over to him and 
ordered him to make Raja Muhammad ruler of Pahang, with 
territory from Sedili Besar to Trengganu. Raja Muhammad was 
at the same time given men suitable for the offices of Bendahara, 
Treasurer and Temenggong. When ships had been made ready, 
the Sri Naraf 377 (? Bija) ‘diraja set out for Pahang, where he 
installed the Raja’s son as ruler, with the title of Sultan Muham¬ 
mad Shah. The Sri Nara (? Bija) ‘diraja then returned to Malaka. 
And the fame of Malaka was spread abroad, from above the wind 
to below the wind. The Arabs gave it the name of Malakat. At 
that time there was no city that was the equal of Malaka, save 
only Pasaif 378 and Haru. The three countries (were of 
equal greatness, so that) their Rajas, however they stood 
to each other in point of age, still sent ‘greetings’ only to each 
other, though the people of Pasai were wont to read as 
‘obeisance’f 379 the word ‘greetings’ in any letter, no matter whence 
it came. 


Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



1126 ] 


translated by C. C. Brown 99 

Chapter XII 

The story of Semerluki, Raja of Mengkasar, and his ambition 
to conquer all the countries below the wind. After raiding Java 
he is worsted at Malaka and later at Pasai. After yet another 
defeat in Malaka waters he returns to Mengkasar. The coming 
of Maulana Abu Balcar with the book Durr Manzum and the 
mission to Pasai to pose a problem of theology. Kadli Yusuf’s 
submission to Maulana Abu Bakar. Sultan Mansur’s attempt to 
gain the hand of the Princess of Gunong Ledang. (Shellabear* chh. 
XIX to p. 127, then XX to p. 129, then XXVI , to end of chapter). 

Here now is a story of Semerluki, Raja of Mengkasar: and 
this is how the tale goes according to the account we have 
received. There was in the land of Mengkasar a city named 
Balului, so powerful that all other cities (in Mengkasar) f 380 were 
subject to it. The Raja of Balului was called Mejokok and he 
had married seven sisters, daughters of Keraing Ditandering 
Jokinak. All seven princesses were consorts of the king, but it 
was the youngest of them who was the most beautiful. The 
eldest princess had a son, to whom his father had given the name 
Keraing Semerluki. In the course of time Keraing Semerluki 
grew up to be a man of such strength and valour that he had no 
peer throughout Mengkasar: and he fell in love with the youngest 
of the seven princesses. Keraing Mejokok became aware of this 
but he refused to let him have the princess, saying, "If, my son, 
you desire a wife as beautiful as your mother's sister, go plunder 
Ujong Tanah and find a girl like her!" Keraing Semerluki there¬ 
upon fitted out a fleet of two hundred ships of various types; and 
Avhen the ships were ready, he set forth, determined to conquer 
every city here below the wind. First he went to Java and ravaged 
many of its provinces. In no country that he attacked had the 
people the courage to try and repel him. He then passed to 
Ujong Tanah waters and ravaged the coastal districts of Malaka. 
And word was brought to Sultan Mansur Shah, "Our coastal 
districts have been utterly laid waste by the Raja of Mengkasar 
who is called Semerluki." Whenf 380a Sultan Mansur Shah heard 
this news, he ordered the Laksamana to intercept Semerluki, 
and the Laksamana made ships ready accordingly. When 
the ships were ready, the Laksamana put out to sea with 
his fleet, and on the arrival of Keraing Semerluki in Malaka waters 
he engaged the Mengkasar fleet and battle was joined, ship charg¬ 
ing ship, and arrows and darts falling like heavy raint 380b . When 
the Laksamana closed the ship of Keraing Semerluki, Keraing 
Semerluki hurled a flying grapel at the Laksamana's ship. It 
took hold and Semerluki ordered his men to wind in, but the 
Laksamana cut it away. And many of Semerluki's ships were 
sunk by the fleet of the Laksamana; but on the Malaka side 
many were killed by the enemy's darts as the antidote for the 
upas poison was not yet known in Malaka. 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



100 


The Malay Annals 


[127] Keraing Semerluki then went on to Pasai, where he laid 
waste many of the provinces. The Raja of Pasai thereupon ordered 
his chief, the Rajaf 381 Kenayan, to drive out Keraing Semerluki. 
The Raja Kenayan accordingly made ready a fleet and when it 
was ready, he put out to sea. When he met the fleet of Keraing, 
Semerluki at Telok Terni (?), the fleet of Pasai engaged the fleet 
of Mengkasar in battle. Keraing Semerlukfs ship closed the ship 
of the Raja Kenayan and Keraing Semerluki ordered a flying; 
grapnel to be hurled. It hit the Raja Kenayan's ship and took 
hold, whereupon Keraing Semerluki ordered his men to wind in. 
And the Raja Kenayan cried, "Wind away! Let me but get nearf 382 
you and IT1 leap aboard your ship and kill the lot of you with 
myf 383 'heeled' sword!" Then said Keraing Semerluki to his 
men, "Quick, cutf 384 away the ropes!" When they had done so, 
the two ships parted: and Keraing Semerluki said, "The Raja 
Kenayan is a braver man than the Laksamana!" He then set sail 
for Mengkasar, passing through Malaka waters; and he was pursued 
by the Laksamana who sank any ships that had become detached 
from the main Mengkasar fleet. So many ships did Keraing 
Semerluki lose that when he came to Ungaran he seized a piece 
of the rockf 385 that ballasted his ship and cast it into the Ungaran 
Straits, saying, "When this rock floats! 380 I will come again to- 
Ujong Tanah waters!" And that isf 38Ga how the place came to be 
called the Cape of the Rock, and the rock is still there to 
this day. Keraing Semerluki then returned to Mengkasar: and 
the Laksamana returned to Malaka and presented himself before 
Sultan Mansur Shah, who gave robes of honour to the Laksamana 
and all those who had gone on the expedition. 

Afterf 387 that, (there arrived by ship one) Maulana Abu 
Bakar bringing with him the book Durr! 388 Manzum. He dis¬ 
embarked and proceeded to Malaka, where he was received with 
every mark of distinction by Sultan Mansur Shah, who ordered! 389 
that (the Durr Manzum) be brought in procession to the hall 
of audience. And Sultan Mansur Shah studied with Maulana 
Abu Bakar, who highly commended his aptitude and the progress 
that he made in his studies. Sultan Mansur Shah then ordered 
that the Durr Manzum be sent to Pasai for an exposition of its 
doctrine by Tuan! 390 Pematakan. Tuan Pematakan set to work 
on the exposition and when it was completed he sent it to Malaka. 
Sultan Mansur Shah was well pleased with it and shewed it to 
Maulana Abu Bakar, who approved of it and complimented Tuan 
Pematakan. 

Sultan Mansur Shah then appointed Tun Bija Wangsa to 
go to Pasai and pose the following problem! 391 of theologv:— 
"Do those in heaven abide there for ever? And do those in hell 
abide there for ever?" Tun Bija Wangsa was to take with him 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



translated by C. C. Brown 


ior 

[127—128] seven tahils of gold dust and two women, one a native of Meng- 
kasar called Dang Bunga and the other a daughter of a yeomanf 392 
of Muar, called Dang Biba. The present sent by Sultan Mansur 
Shah to the Sultan of Pasai consisted of haircloth (?) in yellow 
and in purple with floral designs. And Sultan Mansur Shah 
gave this command to Tun Bjia Wangsa:— “You. are to ask 
the divines of Pasai this question, 'those that are in heaven and 
those that are in hell — do they abide for all time in heaven and 
do they abide for all time in hell, or not?' Whosoever can answer 
this question you are to give to him these seven tahils of gold 
dust and these two women (?f 392a slaves); and the answer that is 
given to you you are to honour with beat of drum and bring back 
here." And Tun Bija Wangsa said, "Very well, your Highness." 
Orders were then given for the letter to be taken in procession to* 
the ship with all the honours accorded to a reigning prince (?): 
and Tun Bija Wangsa set out for Pasai. (? When he reached 
Pasai), the Raja of Pasai (? ordered that) the letter be fetched 
from the ship with every mark of distinction and honour, and 
that it be borne in procession to the hall of audience. When it 
reached the hall, orders were given for it to be read, and the 
Raja of Pasai was well pleased with the wordingf 393 of it. Turn 
Bija Wangsa then did homage to the Raja of Pasai, who asked 
him, "What were the instructions of our brother to you, Tun 
Bija Wangsa?" And Tun Bija Wangsa answered, "The command 
of your Highness 7 elder brother to me was, 'whosoever can answer 
the question propounded in the letter, you are to give to him these 
women (?f 393a slaves) and these seven tahils of gold dust, and the 
answer is to be honoured with beat of drum and brought back to 
Malaka." The Raja of Pasai forthwith sent for Tun Makhdunr 
Mua. And when Tun Makhdum Mua appeared, he was given 
a seat beside the Raja of Pasai. And the Raja of Pasai said to 
him, "Sir, the Raja of Malaka has commanded Tun Bija Wangsa 
to come hither to pose the question whether all those in heaven 
and all those in hell abide there for ever or not. We desire that 
you furnish the answer to this question, that we may not be put 
to shame." And Tun Makhdum Mua said, "Those in heaven 
abide there for ever, those in hell abide there for ever." 
And Tun Bija Wangsa answered, "Is there no other possible 
view?" "There is not, said Tun Makhdum Mua, "for that 
accords with the text of the Koran 'for ever do they remain 7 77 But 
Tun Hasan, a pupil of Tun Makhdum Mua who was sitting there 
at the time, turned his head away, for the answer did not com¬ 
mend itself to him. The Raja of Pasai then retired into the 
palace and all those, present went home. 

When Tun Makhdum Mua reached his house, Tun Hasan f 394 
came and presenting himself before the Makhdum he said, "How 
was it, sir, that you answered the envoy just nowf 395 as you didr 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society .... 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



[128—129] 


102 The Malay Annals 

If that was the answer, the people of Malaka know it already. 
Why then did they send their question here? It looks as though 
there must be some other answer that they require/, Then 
answered Tun Makhdum Mua, "What is the correct answer, to 
your mind?” And Tun Hasan said, "To my mind, the answer 
should be thus and thus.” "You are right!”, said Tun Makhdum 
Mua, "I made mistake, but what isf 396 to be done now? What's 
said is said!” And Tun Hasan said, "There is no difficulty in the 
matter. All you have to do, sir, is to send for the envoy and say to 
him ‘Just now when you asked me that question before the whole 
assembly I gave the answer you heard. But now that we are by 

ourselves I will tell you. The true answer is this.!” Tun 

Makhdum Mua agreed and called Tun Bija Wangsa. He came 
and Tun Makhdum Mua set food before him. After they had 
eaten, Tun Makhdum Mua took Tun Bija Wangsa to a private 
place and said to him, "Just now you put your question to me 
before the whole assembly, and I gave the answer you heard. 
But now I will tell you what the true answer is. It is thisf 397 

Tun Bija Wangsa was highly pleased to hear what Makhdum 
Mua said, and he presented to him the seven tahils of gold dust 
and the two women. He then honoured the answer by beat of 
drum and took it to his ship. And the Raja of Pasai asked, 
"What is it that the envoy is carrying to the beat of drums,” And 
Penghulu Bujang Karikelar, Tun Jana Makhlok Biri-Biri, answered, 
"Your Highness* the envoy has obtained the explanation of the 
matter regarding which inquiry was made; the explanation was 
given by Tun Makhdum Mua as the result of a suggestion bv Tun 
Hasan.' And the king was well pleased to hear this and highly 
commended Tun Hassan. [To Dang Biba, Tun Makhdum Mua 
gave the name of Dang Asiah Bendahari]. Tun Bija Wangsa then 
sought leave of the Raja of Pasai to depart. And the Raja of Pasai 
sent a letter in reply to that of the Raja of Malaka, and it was 
borne in procession with due ceremony: and Tun Bija Wangsa was 
given robes of honour complete with all accessories. Tun Bija 
Wangsa then set forth on his return voyage to Malaka, honouring 
with beat of drum the (answer to the) problem previously men¬ 
tioned. And when he reached Malaka, the answer was borne in 
procession followed bv the letter of the Raja of Pasai. And Sultan 
Mansur Shah was well pleased to hear the answer to the problem, 
which met with the approval of Maulana Abu Bakar, and he highly 
commended Tun Makhdum Mua. 

Now at that time the Kadli of Malaka was one Kadli 
Yusuff 398 , great-grandson of Makhdum Saiyid ‘Abdu'l-Azizf 399 
who effected the conversion of the people of Malaka to Islam. 
Kadli Yusuf did not go to Maulana Abu Bakar for instruction 
because he himself was a profound scholar. But one day, as 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 




translated by C. C. Brown 105 

[129_130] Kadli Yusuf was going to the mosque for the Friday prayers, he 

passed the door of Maulana Abu Bakar's house. It happened that 
at that moment Maulana Abu Bakar was standing in the doorway, 
and he appeared to Kadli Yusuf to be enveloped with light just 
as the wick of a lighted candle is enveloped with its flame: thus 
was the appearance of Maulana Abu Bakar. Forthwith Kadhi 
Yusuf ran to him and did obeisance to him. Maulana Abu Bakar 
received him with a smile, after which Kadli Yusuf went to Mail- 
lana Abu Bakar for instruction. Kadli Yusuf then becamef 40( * 
a recluse: he resigned the office of Kadli and his son Kadli 
Menuaf 401 (? Menawar Shah) became Kadli in his stead and 
took up his abode in Malaka. 

One day when Sultan Mansur Shah was seated in the hall 
of audience in the presence of his chiefs, ministers, courtiers and 
war-chiefs, he said to the chiefs, “We give thanks to Almighty 
God that He has graciously vouchsafed to us a great kingdom, 
but there is one thing we still would fain have: if we may ask it 
of God, we desire to have a wife who shall surpass the wife of any 
prince in the world/' And the chiefs replied, “Is there one to 
be found such as your Highness desires? Your Highness already 
has wedded a princess of Java and a princess of China. Could 
there be better than that? For in days of yore it was only Raja 
Iskandar Dzu'l-Karnain that had a daughter of the Raja of China 
for consort, and now it is none but your Highness that has such 
a consort/' Then said Sultan Mansur Shah, “For one prince 
to marry the daughter of another prince—even other Rajas do 
that: what I desire is a bride such as no other Raja possesses: 
that is the girl we wish to marry." And the chiefs replied. “Mayf 40 - 
it please your Highness to give the command, that we may carry 
it out." “We desire," said Sultan Mansur Shah, “to ask for the 
hand of the Princess of Gunong Ledang, and we appoint the 
Laksamana and Sang Stia to go on our behalf." And the 
Laksamana and Sang Stia said, “Very well, your Highness." Tun 
Mamad was commanded to accompany them, taking with him 
men of Indragirif 403 to clear the path, as Tun Mamad was head¬ 
man of the people of Indragiri. The Laksamana and Sang Stia 
then set out on the journey accompanied by Tun Mamad. 
And after some days, they reached the foot of Gunong Ledang 
and began the ascent of the mountain. And when they were 
about half way up, a wind arose so strong that they could climb 
no further and the path itself became exceedingly difficult. And 
Tun Mamad said to the Laksamana and Sang Stia, “Stay here, 
sir, all of you, while I go up." And when the Laksamana had 
agreed Tun Mamad went ahead with two or three men who 
were good walkers and continued the ascent with them. And 
when they approached the 'singing bamboos', the climbers felt 
as though they were going to be blown away, so strong was the 
wind: the clouds seemed so close as to be within their reach: 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



104 


The Malay Annals 


£130 — 131] an d so sweet was the music of the 'singing bamboos' that birds on 
.the wing stopped to listen to it and every creature that heard it 
was enchanted. Tun Mamad then came upon a garden. He 
^entered it and found four women there. One of them, who was 
.old but still handsome andf 403a wore round her shoulders a cloth 
for carrying, asked Tun Mamad who he was and of what country. 
And Tun Mamad answered, "I am a man of Malaka and I have 
been sent here by Sultan Mansur Shah to ask for the hand of the 
Princess of Gunong Ledang in marriage. But you, lady, what is 
your name?" And she replied,. "My name is Dang Raya Rani, 
and I am the guardian of the Princess of Gunong Ledang. Wait 
here for me while I acquaint the Princess with what you have told 
me.” After saying this Dang Raya Rani and the women with 
her vanished from sight. Presently there appeared an old woman, 
bent double with age, and she said to Tun Mamad, "All that 
you have said, sir, has been related by Dang Raya to the Princess 
of Gunong Ledang, who says, "If the Raja of Malaka desire 
me, let him make for me a bridge of gold and a bridge of silver 
from Malaka to Gunong Ledang: and for a betrothal gift let 
there be seven trays of mosquitos' hearts, seven trays of mites' 
hearts, a vatf 404 of young areca-nut water, a vat of tears, a cup of 
the Raja's blood and a cup of hisf 405 son's blood. On these 
conditions I approve the request of the Raja of Malaka.” After 
she had thus spoken she vanished from sight. According to 
the account we have received the old woman who spoke with 
Tun Mamad was the Princess of Gunong Ledang herself in 
disguise. 

Tun Mamad then went down from the place and returned 
to the Laksamana and Sang Stia, to whom he told all that the 
Princess of Gunong Ledang had said. The Laksamana and his 
companions then descended Gunong Ledang to return to Malaka, 
which they reached after a while. Then the Laksamana, Sang 
Stia and Tun Mamad presented themselves before Sultan Mansur 
and related to him the message they had received from thePrincess 
of Gunong Ledang. And Sultan Mansur Shah said, "All that 
she demands we can provide, save only the blood of our son; that 
we cannot provide, for our heart would not suffer us to take it. 

God knoweth the truth. To him do we return. 


Chapter XIII 

The rising in Pasai against Sultan Zainu 1- Abidin, who flees 
to Malacca. Sultan Mansur sends an expedition to reinstate him, 
but after he has been reinstated he rudely refuses to send his 
'obeisance* to Malacca; and when he is again dethroned, the Malacca 
:men leave him to his fate. 

( Shellabear , chapter XXII ) 


Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 




translated by C. C. Brown 


10? 


t 131 — 132 J Here now is a story of the Raja of Pasai, Sultan Zainal-'Abidin 

as he was called. This Raja of Pasai was one of two brothers, and 
the younger desired to supplant the elder as ruler. In this 
treacherous design he had the support of the people of Pasai and 
they were for killing their Raja. Sultan Zainal-'Abidin according¬ 
ly took flight in a small ship and went to Malaka to seek the 
protection of Sultan Mansur Shah. Sultan Mansur Shah had a 
fleet made ready to take Sultan Zainal-'Abidin back to Pasai. And 
when the fleet was ready, Bendahara Paduka Raja, the Sri Bija 
'diraja, the Laksamana and the war-chiefs were all commanded to 
go and take the Raja back to Pasai. 

In due course the expedition reached Pasai, and the men of: 
Malaka fought with the men of Pasai but did not win the day,, 
for the forces of Malaka numbered but twenty thousand whereas 
those of Pasai numbered a hundred and twenty thousand, even if 
reckoned at only one man from each hamlet. The Laksa¬ 
mana, the Sri Bija 'diraja and the war-chiefs accordingly 
foregathered with Bendahara Paduka Raja to consider what should 
be done. And the Bendahara said, "What think you? Here 
we have been a long time at Pasai but have achieved nothing. 
Had we not better return to Malaka so that the Ruler may be 
spared suspense?" Then said Tun Pikrama, the Bendahara’s 
son, "Why would your Highness return? Have we fought a big. 
battle yet? I think we should make another landing. Let us 
land with the Laksamana, the Sri Bija 'diraja and all the war- 
chiefs." And the Laksamana and the Sri Bija 'diraja said to* 
Bendahara Paduka Raja, "Your son is right. Let mef 406 and my 
men land again." And Bendahara Paduka Raja replied, "Very 
well, to-morrow we will land together." 

Early the next morning the chiefs gathered round the Benda¬ 
hara, and the Bendahara ordered rice to be served for the whole 
party. But the cook said, "We have not enough cups and 
platters, for those that are to be fed are more than twenty dishes 
would suffice for." Then said the Bendahara to the chiefs and 
war-chiefs, "We are about to go into battle. Let us therefore- 
eat all together off leaves." The chiefs agreeing, the Bendahara 
ordered that leaves be spread all along the shore and that rice be 
brought there, whereupon the (Bendahara) f 407 , chiefs, war-chiefs 
and rank and file ate all together off leaves. 

When they had fed, Bendahara Paduka Raja, the Sri Bija 
'diraja, the Laksamana, the Sri Akar 'diraja, Tun Pikrama 
(Pekerma), Tun Telanai, Tun Bijaya, Tun Maha Mentri, Tun 
Bija 'diraja. Sang Naya, Sang Stia, Sang Guna, Tun Bijaya Sura,. 
Sang Jaya Pikrama (Pekerma), Sang Surana, Sang Aria ( diraja), 
Sang Rana, Sang Sura Pahlawan, Sang Stia Pahlawan Raja 
Indera Pahlawan, Sri Raja Pahlawan, Raja Dewa Pahlawan 

J952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



106 


The Malay Annals 

[132—133] and the war-chiefs advanced inland from the shore. The 
sound] 408 of the tramp of their feet was like the roll of thunder 
and their weapons flashed like forked lightning. And the army 
of Pasai came out to meet them, (the tramp of their feet) 
sounded like thunder and (terrifying was) their shouting and 
cheering. Like a sea at high tide the army ot Pasai surged forward, 
their standards and pennons like a forest of trees. And when 
the two armies stood face to face, battle was engaged amid in¬ 
describable din; the shouts of the fighting men commingled with 
the noise of the elephants and horses in such deafening clangour 
that a thunderbolt in the heavens would not have been heard. 
The dead lay thick on either side, blood flowed like a river in 
spate and the ground was strewn with corpses. And so fierce 
was the onslaught of the war-chiefs of Pasai that the Malaka line 
was broken] 409 and the troops fled in disorder to the water’s 
edge. The Bendahara stood on the bank and when he looked 
behind him and saw the water, he cried out to his spear-bearer, 
a boy named Kerangkang, “Get me my spear! Old] 410 though I 
am, alone I’ll send them] 411 sprawling!” Now Tun Pikrama was 
standing his ground, along with Hang Isak and Naina Isahak,. 
their weapons being bows of the Persian] 412 (?) type. The Pasai 
men could make no headway against them; any who tried to 
advance were shot dead. The Pasai men accordingly halted. 
But Naina Isahak said to Tun Pikrama, “How can we continue 
to hold out, just the three of us? Those who have fled do not 
know that we are holding out. If you two will stay here, I will 
go and rally the men who have run away.!” Tun Pikrama agreed, 
so Naina Isahak] 413 set forth to rally the fugitives and every 
man that he met he ordered to go back to Tun Pikrama; and they 
all went back. Presently Naina Isahak came up with Hang 
Hamzah, son-in-law of Tun Pikrama, running] 414 hell for leather 
with never a glance behind him or troubling to follow the regular 
path. Naina Isahak hailed] 415 him, saying, “Hang Hamzah! 
Why are you scuttling away on your belly like a lizard? When 
Tun Pikrama took you for son-in-law, wasn’t it because you were 
such a fine strapping young fellow with the curly hair of a hero? 
People thought ‘here’s a brave man’!” And Hang Hamzah 
replied, “What, is Tun Pikrama still back there?” And when 
Naina Isahak said that he was. Hang Hamzah went back, with 
Bis buckler hung with bells and his spear with its handle] 416 
•of mother-of-pearl. And leaping into the air and crying “I am 
the Hamzah of the latter days”] 417 he charged the Pasai host 
that stretched like a sea in front of him. And all the other men 
•of Malaka likewise charged the Pasai troops, killing every man 
they encountered. And the men of Pasai broke and fled in 
disorder, leaving many dead on the field. And the men of 
Malacca (pursued them)] 418 to the Muhammadan bridge (?) 
and then forced their way (? into the palace domain) through the 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



107 


translated by C. C. Brown 

[133—134] outer gate and captured the palace. Thus fell Pasai and Sultan 
Zainal 'Abidin was then installed as Raja by Bendahara Paduka 
Raja. After spending some days organizing the administration 
of Sultan Zainal 'Abidin the Bendahara sought Sultan Zainal 
'Abidin's leave to depart, and he said to him, "What message 
of homage have you to send to your royal father?" And Sultan 
Zainal 'Abidin answered, "Homage donef 419 in Malaka stays in 
Malaka." And Bendahara Paduka Raja was so incensed at this 
reply that he said, "The homage I have done in Pasai stays in 
Pasai then!" He then went aboard his ship and with the other 
Malaka men set out to return. When they reached Jambu Ayer, 
word was brought from the shore that Sultan Zainal 'Abidin had 
been attacked by the people of Pasai. Bendahara Paduka Raja 
then sent for the Sri Bija 'diraja, the Laksamana and the war- 
chiefs; and when they had come, the Bendahara took counsel 
of them. And the Laksamana said, "Let us return to Pasai and 
establish Sultan Zainal 'Abidin once more on the throne." But 
the Bendahara replied, "No, I am no longer prepared to do that r 
for he refuses to do obeisance to the Ruler." Then said all the 
chiefs, "So be it! We follow your decision, Bendahara." Sa 
the Bendahara resumed his homeward voyage. 

And when in due course they reached Malaka, the chiefs 
presented themselves before Sultan Mansur Shah. And Sultan 
Mansur Shah was displeased with the Bendahara for refusing to 
go back to Pasai to established Sultan Zainal 'Abidin on the 
throne, and he sent for the Laksamana. And when the Lak¬ 
samana appeared, Sultan Mansur Shah questioned him as to what 
had happened at Pasai, and the Laksamana spoke disparagingly 
of the Bendahara's conduct. And Sultan Mansur Shah was 
event 419 * more gravely displeased with the Bendahara, whose 
people were all present at the time, and he retired into the palace. 
All those present then went home, and the Bendahara s people 
repaired to his house, where they related to him all that the Laksa¬ 
mana had said in disparagement of the Bendahara s conduct. 
And Bendahara Paduka Raja remained silent. The next 
day Sultan Mansur Shah came out of the palace and 
gave an audience, at which all the officers of state were 
present, save only the Laksamana. Sultan Mansur Shah 

then sent for the Bendahara. And when Bendahara Paduka 
Raja came, Sultan Mansur Shah questioned him as to what had 
passed at Pasai, and the Bendahara paid many compliments to 
the conduct of the Laksamana. Sultan Mansur Shah was greatly 
astonished, and he presented the Bendahara with robes of honour. 
The Laksamana s people were present at the time. When the 
Raja had gone into the palace and all those present had gone 
home, the Laksamana's people returned to his house where they 
told him what the Bendahara had said in compliment to the 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



10S 


The Malay Annals 

[134 — 135] Laksamana. Forthwith the Laksamana went to the house of the 
Bendahara, whom he found seated in his public hall with people 
before him, and he prostrated himself at the Bendahara's feet, 
saying, "Verily you are a chief among chiefs/' Tradition has it 
that the Laksamana prostrated himself seven times at the feet of 
the Bendahara. Afterwards Sultan Mansur Shah gave robes of 
honour to Tun Pikrama and Hang Hamzah, and to Tun Pikrama 
he gave the title of Paduka Tuan, at the same time bestowing 
upon him the fief of Buru, in recognition of his services in the 
defeat of Pasai. Buru at that time had a fleet of forty ships. 
Tun Pikrama',s con, Tun Ahmad, was then given the title of Tun 
Pikrama Wira and Hang Hamzah the title of Tun Perpateh 
Kasim. This Tun Perpateh was the father of a daughter who 
became the mother of Sri Pikrama Raja Tun Tahir, or Tun 
Utusan as some peoplef 420 called him. Laksamana Sura 'diraja 
was also the son of this Tun Perpateh. 

God knoweth the truth. To Him do we return 

Chapter XIV 

The story of the Raja of Champa; how he discovered a 
child in the blossom of an areca palm and gave the child the 
name of Raja Pau Glang. When he grows up, Raja Pau Glang 
marries the Raja of Champa’s daughter and ultimately succeeds 
him on the throne. Raja Pali Glang’s gandson Pau Gma, 
marries the daughter of the Batara of Majapahit and then 
returns to Champa, leaving his bride behind in Majapahit. 
The son of this marriage, Raja Jakanak, is born at Majapahit 
but goes in due course to visit his father, Pau Gma, in Champa 
and later succeeds him on the throne. Champa is invaded by 
the Raja of Kuchi and the Raja of Champa is killed. His sons 
escape, one to Acheh and one (Shah Indra Berma) to Malacca, 
where he is welcomed by Sultan Mansur and he and his followers 
embrace Islam. From them is sprung the Cham community at 
Malacca. The death of Sultan Mansur. He is succeeded by 
Raja Radin, his son by the Batara of Majapahit’s daughter, 
who takes the title of Sultan Ala’u’d-din Ri’ayat Shah. The 
attempt of Raja Tua, his grandmother,, to take his life so that 
Raja Muhammad (exiled to Pahang in chapter XI) should 
succeed to the throne. 

The whims of Bendahara Paduka Raja. Sultan Ala’u’d- 
din puts down robbery in Malacca by himself acting as police¬ 
man in disguise. The visit of the Raja of the Moluccas and 
his prowess as a sepak raga player. The visit of the Telanai 
of Trengganu ‘without the knowledge of’ the Sultan of Pahang 
results in the murder of the Telanai and vigorous reprisals 
from Malacca. Similarily an execution of an offender by the 
Raja of Siak ‘without the knowledge of’ Malacca earns Sultan 
Ibrahim a stern rebuke. The death of Bendahara Paduka 
Raja. 

(Shelkbeai, chh. XXI, XXIII, XXV and XXVI) 

Here now is a story of the Raja of Champa which according 
to the account we have received is as follows. 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



109 


translated by C. C. Brown 

[ 135 — 136 ] There was a certain Raja of Champa who lived in a city 

named Malapatata. Near the palace of the Raja of Champa 
there was an areca palm, on which there was a blossom of great 
size; but wait as they might for it to unfold, it still did not un¬ 
fold. And the Raja of Champa said to his slave, "Climb the 
palm and see what is the matter with that blossom/' 

And the boy climbed the palm, picked the blossom and 
brought it down. The Raja opened the blossom and beheld 
therein a male child of great beauty. And the sheath of the 
blossom became the state gong known as Jemin g, while the 
stamen of it became the sword known as beladau, which is the 
state sword of the Raja of Champa. And the Raja of Champa was 
delighted with the child, to whom he gave the name of Raja Pau 
Glang. He ordered that the child be suckled by the wives of 
princes and ministers, but it refused to take the breast. Now 
the Raja of Champa had a brindled cow with a young calf. He 
milked the calf and gave the child the milk: and the child took 
it. Which is why to this day the Chams refuse to drink cow's 
milk or to kill a cow. 

Pau Glang grew up. And it happened that the Raja of 
Champa who found Pau Glang had a daughter, called Pau Bia. 
This daughter the Raja of Champa gave in marriage to Pau 
Glang who came forth from the palm blossom. And when in 
the course of time the Raja of Champa died, Pau Glang became 
Raja in succession to his father-in-law. When Pau Glang had 
come to the throne he built a city so great that it encompassed 
sevenf 422 mountains, and its extent was such that one sidef 423 of 
it made a whole day's voyage with a fresh wind. When the city 
was completed, he gave it the name of Yak. After a time Pau 
Glang had a son, called Pau Tri. When Pau Tri had grown up, 
Pau Glang died and Pau Tri became Raja and was duly installed 
as the successor of his father. Pau Tri took to wife a princess 
named Bia Suri, by whom he had a son. He called his son Pau 
Gma; and when in the course of time Pau Gma grew up, Pau 
Tri died and was succeeded on the throne by Pau Gma. And 
Pau Gma had ships made ready to take him to Majapahit to do 
homage, f 424 (And when the ships were ready, he set forth 
to Majapahit and) after a voyage of some days he reached 
Menara(?) When the Batara of Majapahit heard that the Raja 
of Champa was on his way to Majapahit to do homage, he 
commanded his chiefs to welcome him. And when they had 
met Pau Gma, they escorted him into Majapahit with every 
mark of honour and distinction. (And when he reached 
Majapahit) Pau Gma was married by the Batara to his daughter 
Radin Galoh Ajang. After a time Radin Galoh was with child. 
And Pau Gma sought leave to return to his country. The 
Batara of Majapahit agreed, but said, "I cannot consent to your 

.1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



110 


The Malay Annals 

[136—137] taking my daughter with you. ' And Pau Gma answered, “S o 
be it; never would I oppose the wishes of your Highness. I 
myself, all f 425 being well, will soon return hither to present 
myself before your Highness/' Pau Gma then took leave of his 
wife Radin Galoh; and she asked, “If your child is born, what 
shall be his name?" Pau Gma replied, “If my child is born, his 
name shall be Raja Jakanak. When he comes to man's estate, 
send him to me in Champa." And his wife agreed. Pau Gma 
then went aboard his ship and set forth on the return voyage 
to Champa. After he had departed Radin Galoh Ajang brought 
forth a son, to whom she gave the name Raja Jakanak. And 
when the child had grown up, his mother told him of the in* 
junctions his father had left with her. When Raja Jakanak 
heard the words of his mother, he gave orders for planksf 420 to 
be made for fitting to a number of ships: and when the work 
had been completed he sought leave of the Batara of Majapahit 
to go and see his father in Champa. And when after a long 
voyage he reached Champa, he went to the palace and pre¬ 
sented himself before his father, Pau Gma. And Pau Gma was 
overjoyed to see his son and installed him as Raja Jakanak who 
succeeded him as ruler of Champa. And he took as his consort 
one Pau Ji Bat Ji, and by her he had a son, named Pau Kubah.. 

When Pau Kubah had grown up, Raja Jakanak died and 
Pau Kubah became Raja. He took for his consort Pau Mechat, 
by whom he had several sons and daughters. One of the 
daughters was exceedingly beautiful and her hand in marriage 
was sought by the Raja off 427 Kuchi, but Pau Kubah rejected 
his suit. The Raja of Kuchi accordingly invaded Champa: and 
the men of Kuchi fought a fierce battle with the men of Champa. 
One day the Raja of Kuchi sent messengers to the Treasurer of 
Champa to win him over to his side. The Treasurer of 
Champa acquiesced (and undertook to) open the gate. Accord¬ 
ingly when day dawned he opened the gate and the men of 
Kuchi entered the city and fought the men of Champa, some 
of whom resisted, while the others concerned themselves with 
saving their families. And Yak fell and the Raja of Champa 
was killed. And the children of the Raja of Champa together 
with the ministers scattered and fled in all directions. Two 
sons of the Raja, one of them named Indra Berma Shah and 
the other Shah Palembang, escaped by ship, Shah Palembang 
to Acheh and Shah Indra Berma (sic) to Malaka. Sultan Mansur 
Shah was well pleased to see Shah Indra Berma (and his fol¬ 
lowers), and he ordered them all fo embrace Islam. Shah 
Indra Berma, his consort Kini Mertam and all who accompani¬ 
ed them accordingly embraced Islam. And Sultan Mansur 
Shah made Shah Indra Berma one of his ministers and he be¬ 
came one of his great favourites. That was the origin of the 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



Ill 


translated by C. C. Brown 

[ 137 — 138 ] Chamsf 428 of Malaka, all of whom are sprung from Shah Indra 
Berma and his descendants. 

And when Sultan Mansur Shah had reigned for seventy-three 
years, then in the process of time he fell sick. And summoning 
his children, the Bendahara and the chiefs, he said to them, "Be 
it known to all of you, this world I feel to be slipping from my 
grasp and all that I now yearn for is the City of Eternity. To 
Bendahara Paduka Raja and all the chiefs we commit our son 
Rajaf 429 Radin here; he shall take my place with you all and if he 
does aught that is wrong, you must forgive him, for he is but a 
boy, ignorant of our customs. All the more therefore should 
you instruct him in any and every matter/' Then turning to 
his son Raja Radin he said, "Upon you is laid the duty of faith¬ 
fully cherishing those who are subject to you and of liberally 
forgiving any offences they may commit, as we are bidden by 
Almighty God in the words 'Verily God is with them that shew 
forbearance.' If you are confronted with your own business and 
the business of God, put the business of God before your own: 
and submit yourself utterly to the will of God, for the Prophet 
saith ‘Resign Thyself to the will of God and that shall suffice 
unto thee'. Do "as I am telling you, my son, and assuredly you 
shall receive the blessing of Almighty God and the blessing of his 
Prophet (may God bless him and give him peace)." And when 
they heard these words of Sultan Mansur Shah, they all wept 
bitterly: and Bendahara Paduka Raja and the ministers said, 
"Crush not our hearts, your Highness, with such words. Verily 
do we make a vow that if it shall please Almighty God this time 
to heal your Highness of the sickness that is upon you, all the 
wealth that the treasury holds shall be distributed by us as alms 
to the poor and needy. But—f 430 though God forbid that it 
should be so—if perchance the grass should wither in your 
Highness' mead, then our sole concern shall be to give effect to 
your Highness' bidding." Sultan Mansur Shah then died, and 
he was buried with all the traditional ceremonies accorded to 
princes. And he was succeeded on the throne bv Raja Radin, 
who was installed by Bendahara Paduka Raja with the title of 
Sultan Alau'd-din Ri'ayat Shah.. Now Sultan Ala'u'd-din was a 
man of such strength that he had no rival in those days. And 
it happened that after a time Sultan Ala'u'd-din fell sickf 431 of a 
diarrhoea, sa acute that he was easing himself twelve times a day. 

• Bendahara Paduka Raja and the Laksamana never left the Raja's 
side ,(the Bendahara) feeding him, as one would feed a child, ten 
or twenty times a day and the Laksamana bathing him twentv or 
thirty times a day. Now Sultan Ala'u'd-din had a grandmother, 
who was known as Raja Tua: she was the mother of Raja Mansur 
Shah and her grandson, Sultan Muhammad, who was the ruler 
(of Pahang) was a great favourite of hers. She desired the death 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



112 


The Malay Annals 


[ 138 — 139 ] of Sultan AlaVd-din so that Sultan Muhammad Shah should 
become Raja of Malaka. After a few days Sultan Ala'u'd-din was 
a little better and he had a meal of rice and milk; but he then 
had a relapse and was on the point of death. Bendahara Paduka 
Raja and the Laksamana were informed and came forthwith h> 
the palace. Raja Tua's idea was, “Let me get to the palace and 
I will lay myself down on Sultan AlaVd-din and weep over him, 
so that he may die while I lie upon him'.' When Raja Tua 
arrived and wished to approach the bedside of Sultan AlaVd-din,. 
Bendahara Paduka Raja and the Laksamana forbade her, saying, 
“Go not, your Highness, near to your grandson!" And Raja Tua 
said, “Here am If 342 come to the death bed and Fm not allowed 
to come near?" To which they replied, “If your Highness goes 
near him, we will attack you!" Then said Raja Tua, “Beholdf 433 , 
here are Malays being disloyal!" And the Bendahara and the: 
Laksamana answered, “Yes, thisf 434 once Malays will be disloyal! 
If your Highness persists in going near your grandson, nothing; 
shall stop us attacking you!” Raja Tua accordingly abandoned 
the idea of approaching Sultan AlaVd-din. And Bendahara 
Paduka Raja, the Treasurerf 434a and the Laksamana tended Sultan 
AlaVd-din diligently and he was preserved by God Almighty: 
his alloted span in the Book of Life was not yet rubbedf 434b out. 

And Sultan AlaVd-din recovered. And he gave robes of 
honour to Bendahara Paduka Raja and the Laksamana; and he 
also gave to each of them a litterf 435 in which they were to be 
carried wherever they went, with their people escorting them. 
Now Bendahara Paduka Raja had his litter wrapped in yellow^ 
(and hung) in his public hall. And his people said to him, 
“How is it that you are so simple, sir? The Raja gives you a litter 
but you merely store it! The Laksamana is given a litter by the 
Raja and he is carried in it wherever he goes, escorted by his 
people marching alongside the litter. That makes a fine show. 
But you, sir, if ever you dot 430 go out in your litter, never have 
one of us to escort you!” And Bendahara Paduka Raja answered,. 
“Is it If 437 who am so simple (or is it you)? When the Laksa¬ 
mana goes out in his litter with his people marching alongside, 
strangers who see him ask, 'Who is that in the litter?' and they 
are told 'That is the Laksamana.' Then they ask, ‘Is he a great 
man, this Laksamana?' And people answer, 'Yes, he is.' Then 
they ask, 'Is there any one greater than he?' And people answer,. 
'Yes, Bendahara Paduka Raja is greater than he.' Well then, 
if I go out in my litter, equally people will ask, 'Is he a great man, 
this Bendahara?' And the answer will come, 'Yes, he is.' Then 
they will ask, 'Is there any one greater than he?' And they will 
get the answer, 'No, there is not.” Assuredly those who do not 
know the real position will take me for the Raja himself, for our 
Raja is yet but a boy. And there is another thing. If the Raja 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 




Un¬ 


translated by C. C. Brown 

[139—140] goes out in his litter, all of you escort the litter. That being so, 

I am likely to be confused with the Raja, and where then would 
be his superiority over me? As for the Laksamana, his people do 
not appear at court, whereas all of you are always in the Raja’s 
audience-hall.” This retort silenced Bendahara Paduka Raja’s 
people. 

Now it was the habit of Bendahara Paduka Raja, if ever he 
obtained a good boat or a good weapon and the Laksamana 
coming to hear of it asked to see it, to refuse to show it to him. 
The Laksamana however would persist with his request to see 
it; and when he became importunate, then at last Bendahara 
Paduka Raja would shew it to him. No sooner had the Laksa¬ 
mana set eyes on the thing than he would take it. This happen¬ 
ed time and again. And the Bendahara’s people said to him, 
“How is it that you are so simple, sir? If ever you have a good 
weapon or a good boat you give it to the Laksamana, with the 
result that your own people get not a thing!” And Bendahara 
Paduka Raja replied, “Is it If 438 who am so simple, or you? If I 
have a good elephant or a good horse, ask me for it if you like. 
But what do any of you know about such things (as weapons and 
boats)? The Laksamana is a great war-chief and that is why, if 
I have a good weapon, I give it to him, so ’that if the Raja’s 
enemies attack we can pit him against them and people will be 
sure to regard him not as the Raja’s war-chief but as our war- 
chief?” And when the Bendahara’s people heard this, they kept 
silent. 

After Sultan Ala’u’d-din had been some years on the throne 
he had a number of sons and daughters by his consort, Tunf 439 
Naja, who was a daughter of the old Sri Nara 'diraja and a sister 
of the Sri Maharaja. Of the sons one was called Sultan Ahmad, 
another Sultan 'Abdu’l-Jamal: and his eldest daughter he gave in 
marriage to (a son of) thef 440 Raja (of Pahang) called Sultan 
Ahmad. By his royal wife Sultan Ala’u’d-din had two sons, Raja 
Menawar Shah and Raja Zainal. Raja Menawar Shah was older 
than Raja Mahmudf 441 , but it was Raja Mahmud that Sultan 
Ala’u’d-din wished should succeed him on the throne. 

Now it happened once that thieves were rife in the city of 
Malaka and people were being robbed night after night. So 
distressed was Sultan Ala’u’d-din to hear of the depredations of 
these thieves that one night having dressed himself like a thief 
he went in disguise with Hang Isak and Hang Siak round the city 
to see what was going on. On reaching a certain spot the king 
came upon five thieves carrying a chest slung on a pole. He 
set upon them and the thieves took fright and bolted, all five 
of them, and they threwf 442 away (?) the chest. And^ Sultan 
Ala’u’d-din said to Hang Isak, “Stand guard over this chest.” And 

19S2] Royal Asiatic Society . 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



114 


The Malay Annals 

[ 140 — 141 ] Hang Isak answered, "Very well, your Highness/' Sultan Ala'u' d- 
din and Hang Siak then went off in pursuit of the five thieves, 
who fled up the hill. The king followed them up the hill and 
over-took them under a bodi* tree. With a shout Sultan 

Ala'u'd-din slashed at one of them and cut him in half, 
cleaving his waist as though it had been a gourd. The 
other four thieves ran away towards the bridge, pursued 
by the king. And when they came to the entrance of 
the bridgef 443 the king killed another of them; whereupon 
the remaining three dived into the water and swam to the 
other side of the river. Sultan Ala'u'd-din then returned, and 
when he reached the gate where Hang Isak was standing guard 
(? over the chest), he said to Hang Isak, "Take this chest to 
your house." And Hang Isak replied, "Very well, your High¬ 
ness." Sultan Ala'u'd-din then returned to the palace. 

The next morning Sultan Ala'u'd-din appeared in the audience 
hall and Bendahara Paduka Raja, the chiefs, officers, knights, 
courtiers, heralds and war-chiefs all were present. Addressing 
the Sri Maharaja, because he was the Temenggong, Sultan Ala'u 
’d-din asked, "Was there a guard last night?" When the 
Sri Maharaja answered that there was, Sultan Ala'u'd-din said, 
"We hear that a man was killed on the hill and another at the 
entrance to the bridge. Whose! 444 was the man that killed each 
of the two men?" And when the Sri Maharaja answered that 
he did not know, Sultan Ala'u'd-din remarked, "Your guard seems 
to be of little use, Sri Maharaja; we hear that thieves are rampant 
in this city!" He then sent for Hang Isak and Hang Siak, bid¬ 
ding them bring the chest. When in due course they appeared! 445 
with the chest, Sultan Ala'u'd-din asked, "What did you hear 
of! 446 last night? Tell the Bendahara and all the chiefs here 
present." Hang Isak and Hang Siak then related all that had 
happened: whereupon the chiefs did obeisance to Sultan Ala'u'd- 
din with fear in their hearts and their heads bent low in shame. 
Sultan Ala'u'd-in then ordered inquiry to be made for the owner 
of the chest. This was done and a merchant name Ki Tirubalam 
was found to be the owner*. Sultan Ala'u'd*dfri accordingly 
ordered the chest to be restored to him: after which Sultan Ala'u' 
d-din retired into the palace and the chiefs returned each to his 
own house. 

That night the Sri Maharaja kept a very strict guard and he 
came upon a thief, whom he slashed with his sword, severing 
the man's arm from the shoulder: and the severed arm hung on 
the crossbar of a shop. The next morning when the shopkeeper 
was opening her shop she was startled to behold a man's arm 
hanging from the crossbar and she shrieked! 447 aloud. From that 

* Ficus religiosa 


Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 




translated by C. C. Brown 115 

[ 141 — 142 ] day onwards there were no more thieves in Malaka. That was 
how Sultan Ala'u'd-din ruled in Malaka. 

And it happened once that a man had committed some 
offence against Raja Mahmud, the son of Sultan Ala'u'd-din who 
was going to succeed to the throne: and although the man's 
offence was nothing! 448 serious, the Sri Maharaja! 44811 ordered him 
to be put to death, and he was killed. When this came to the 
ears of Bendahara Paduka Raja he said, "Look at the Sri Maharaja, 
he's teaching! 449 a tiger cub to eat flesh. One of these daysf 449a he 
himself will be caught by the tiger!" 

Ere long the Raja of the Moluccas came to Malaka to do 
homage; and it happened that at that time the Telanai! 400 of 
Trengganu and the Raja of Rekan were at Malaka doing homage. 
The Raja of the Moluccas was given robes of honour and other 
presents as befitted his rank. He was an expert at Malay football 
(sepak raga) and the young nobles of Malaka played football with 
him, he being the leader! 431 in each game. When the ball came 
to him, he would kick it himself a hundred or even a 
hundred and fifty times before he passed it to someone else; 
and he would indicate to whomsoever he proposed to give the 
ball and then pass it without once making a a mistake. Then he 
would sit down on a chair to rest and be fanned by men in pairs, 
while the young men went on playing. Then when (? he 
resumed playing and) the ball came to him, the Raja of the 
Moluccas would kick it himself for as long as it takes to cook 
pot! 452 after pot of rice and the ball would stay up in the air 
until he wished to pass! 453 it to someone else: such was his! 454 
skill at the game. And he was posessed of great strength: with 
a single stroke of his sword! 455 he could cut through a coconut 
palm big! 456 enough to be bearing fruit. The Telanai of Treng¬ 
ganu could drive a spear through such a palm, and Sultan Ala'u'd- 
din who was even more powerful still, could shoot it away with 
an arrow! The Raja of the Moluccas* and the Telanai of 
Trengganu were great favourites of Sultan Ala'u'd-din. 

One day the Raja of the Moluccas borrowed a horse from 
Maulana Yusuf: which prompted the following verse 

My lord of Maluka borrowed a horse; 

From the Maulana he borrowed it; 

Of our young men he's the life and soul; 

Yet he's mature in wisdom and wit! 

After they had stayed for some while in Malaka, the Raja of 
the Moluccas and the Telanai of Trengganu took their leave of 
of Sultan Ala'u'd-din and returned each to his own country. And 
when Sultan Muhammad in Pahang heard that Tun Telanai of 
Trengganu had gone to Malaka to pay homage without! 407 his 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



116 


The Malay Annals 


J142—143] consent he ordered the Sri Akar Raja to go to Trengganu and kill 
the Telanai. And when the Sri Akar Raja reached Trengganu, he 
sent for the Telanai. But the Telanai refused to come, saying, 
"Is it in accordance with the custom that onef 458 war-chief should 
summon another?” The Sri Akar Raja then ordered that the 
Telanai should be attacked and killed, and the Telanai was killed. 
The Sri Akar Raja then returned to Pahang and Sultan Muhammad 
gave Trengganu to him as his fief. But when the news reached 
Malaka that the Telanai of Trengganu had been killed on the 
orders of the Sultan of Pahang, Sultan Ala'u'd-din was highly 
enraged and said, "(The Raja of) Pahang has flouted our authority 
.and I am minded to order the invasion of his country/' But 
Bendahara Paduka Raja said, “May your Highness graciously 
pardon his humble servant, my advice is that we should not 
forwith destroy Pahang, for if anything should happen to the 
Rajaf 459 of Pahang, it is your Highness who will suffer loss. I 
suggest that the Laksamana be sent to Pahang." And Sultan 
Ala'u'd-din answered, "Very well, we will be guided by your 
advice." So the Laksamana set about preparing ships: and when 
they were ready, the letter he was to take was borne in procession 
to his ship. He then set sail for Pahang: and when in due course 
arrived there, word was brought to Sultan Muhammad, the Raja 
of Pahang, that "the Laksamana has come, having been com¬ 
manded by your Highness' younger brother to come from Malaka 
and present himself before you." The king then appeared from 
the palace and gave an audience; and he gave orders for the letter 
to be fetched with due ceremony from the ship, this task being 
assigned to Sri Pekerma Raja Pahlawan, Bendahara of Pahang. 
When he reached the Laksamana's ship, the Laksamana dis¬ 
embarked; and the letter he brought was formally received and 
borne by elephant in procession, with two white umbrellas side by 
side, drums, pipe and trumpet. And the Laksamana gave instruc¬ 
tions to one of his men that whenf 460 the letter had been read he 
f 460a was to kill a relative of the Sri Akar Raja, The man duly ac¬ 
cepted the instructions. When the letter was brought into the 
palace precincts, all those present in audience left the hall and the 
Raja of Pahang remained alone. The elephant bearing the letter 
was then brought alongside the hall of audience, the letter was 
taken down from the elephant and it was then read. It was 
worded thus:—"Greetings and prayers to God from the younger 
brother to the elder brother." 

When the letter had been read, all took their appointed seats, 
the Laksamana did obeisance and then seated himself. Hardly 
were they seated when there came the sound as of a tumult 
outside. The Raja of Pahang asked what the tumult was and 
received the answer, "Your Highness, one of the Laksamana of 
Malaka's men has murdered the Sri Akar Raja's cousin." And 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



translated by C. C. Brown 


117 


[143] the Raja of Pahang said to the Laksamana, ‘'one of your men, sir, 
has killed a cousin of the Sri Akar Raja. Please inquire into 
matter, sir/' [For it was the custom of the Raja of Pahang to 
call Malaka chiefsf 461 “sir"] The Laksamana then gave orders for 
the man who had done the killing to be brought in. And the 
man came in, bound. The Laksamana asked him whether it was 
true that he had killed a relative of the Sri Akar Raja. When 
the man admitted that he had, the Laksamana said to the Raja 
of Pahang, “It is true that the man killed a cousin of the Sri 
Akar Raja. Nevertheless I cannot consent to any account being 
taken of this, for the Sri Akar Raja himself offended against the 
Raja of Malaka in killing the Telanai of Trengganu without 
obtaining sanction from Malaka." And the Raja of Pahang was 
silent. After the Laksamana had stayed some time in Pahang he 
sought the Raja's leave to depart. And the Raja of Pahang replied 
to the letter from Malaka to the following effect, “The elder 
brother sends obeisance to his younger brother." The Laksamana 
was then given robes of honour by the king, and the letter was 
borne in procession to the ship in accordance with custom. The 
Laksamana then set forth on his return journey to Malaka: and 
when he arrived there, Sultan Ala'u'd-din gave orders for the 
letter to be brought from the ship and borne by elephant in 
procession, with one white umbrella and one yellow umbrella. 
When the procession reached the outerf 462 gate, the elephant 
was made to kneel f 463 and the letter was carried on foot, the 
drums and pipe remaining outside. When the procession reached 
the palace, the herald on the right hand was ordered to receive 
the letter. Orders were then given for the letter to be read. 
When the letter had been read, the Laksamana went up and did 
homage and then sat down at his appointed place. And when 
Sultan Ala’u'd-din questioned him, the Laksamana told him all 
that had happened. And Sultan Ala'u’d-din was well pleased 
and bountifully rewarded the Laksamana. 

To come now to Sultan Ibrahimf 464 , Raja of Siak. There 
was a man of Siak who had offended against him and 
he ordered Tun Jana Fakil to put the man to death. Tun Jana 
Fakil did as he was ordered, and presently the news reached 
Malaka that the Raja of Siak had put a man to death without 
sanction from Malaka. Sultan Ala'u'd-din accordingly command¬ 
ed the Laksamana to go to Siak. The Laksamana had ships made 
ready, the letter to Siak was taken to the Lasamana's ship and he 
sailed for Siak. When he arrived at Siak, Sultan Ibrahim 
ordered the letter to be received from the ship (and borne in 
procession to the palace) with the same ceremonial as the Rajaf 465 
of Pahang used for having letters brought from a ship. The 
elephant bearing the letter was brought alongside the hall of 
audience, the letter was formally received and was then read. 

1952} Royal Asiatic Society . 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



118 


The Malay Annals 

[143—144] When it had been read, the Laksamana said to Tun Jana Fakil r 
“Is it true that you killed Tun (so and so) son of Tun (so and 
so) ?” And Tun Jana Fakil answered, “It is true: I was com¬ 
manded to do it by the Raja.” Then the Laksamana turned 
awayf 460 from Sultan Ibrahim and facing Tun Jana Fakil he 
pointed to him with his left] 400 ” hand and said, “You are a man of 
little] 407 discretion! You must indeed be a jungleman not] 408 
to know the rudiments of proper behaviour! Do you think it is 
permitted to put people to death without sanction from Malaka? 
Are you going to be a law unto yourselves here in Siak?” And 
Sultan Ibrahim and his chiefs were silent and made no answer 
to the Laksamana. 

After the Laksamana had been some time in Siak he sought 
leave to depart. And Sultan Ibrahim gave him robes of honour 
and sent a letter to Malaka, which ran as follows “The elder 
brother has erred, he can only hope for the generous pardon of 
his younger brother.” The letter was taken (to the ship ?) 
and the Laksamana set out on his return voyage. When he 
arrived at Malaka, the letter was taken] 409 (to the palace ?) and 
when it had been brought in to the Raja it was read. After it 
had been read, the Laksamana did homage and went to his seat. 
And when Sultan Ala’u’d-din inquired of the Laksamana, the 
Laksamana told him of all that had happened: and Sultan 
Ala’u’d-din was well pleased and richly rewarded the Laksamana. 

And Bendahara Paduka Raja fell grievously sick. And he sent 
for all his family, including those who lived a whole day’s journey 
or even two day’s journey away. And when they had all 
assembled, he gave to them his dying injunctions, speaking 
thus to them, “Think not, my children, to truck your religion 
for (the attractions of) this world: for this] 470 world will not 
endure, and for those that live there is but one end and that is 
death. In all sincerity of heart do your duty towards God 
Almighty and the Apostle of God (may God bless him and give 
him peace). And do your duty towards your Raja, forgetting 
not what the divines] 471 tell us,' that a just prince] 472 is joined 
with the Prophet of God like two] 473 jewels in one ring. More¬ 
over the Raja is as it were the deputy of God. When you do- 
your duty to the Prophet of God it is as though you were doing 
it to God Himself, as says the Word of God in„ the Koran 
“Ati’u’llaha wa’ ati’u’r-rasula wa’ ulu’I-amri minkum”, that is to 
say 'Do your duty towards God and the Apostle of God’. These 
are my last injunctions. Forget them not, that you may obtain 
the glory of this world and the world to come.” 

The Bendahara then turned his eyes towards (the Sri Nara] 474 
‘diraja) Sri Maharaja Mutahir, to whom he said, “You, Mutahir r 
will be a great man; your greatness will exceed mine. But think 
not to play the part of uncle] 475 of the Raja. If such a thought 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



119 


translated by C. C. Brown 

[ 145 ] comes into your mind, you will be killed/' The Bendahara 
then turned towards Tun Zainal 'Abidin, to whom he said, "Tun 
Zainal-'Abidin, if you fail to obtain officef 470 at court, go and 
dwell in the forest, for shoots and leaves make a good enoughf 477 
meal for a man with a smallf 478 appetite!" And to Tun Pawah 
the Bendahara said, "Dwell not in the city, Pawah! Go dwell 
on some river reach that the scum f 479 which floats down the 
river may turn into gold for you'." And then to Tun Isak he 
said, "Isak, seek not your livelihood in the Raja's audience-hall!" 
Such were the last injunctions of Bendahara Paduka Raja to his 
family; not after the same fashion to all of them but as was 
appropriate to each. 

And when Sultan Ala'u'd-din heard that Bendahara Paduka 
Raja was grievously ill, he went to see him. And Bendahara 
Paduka Raja did obeisance to Sultan Ala'u'd-din and said, "I feel, 
your Highness, that this world is slipping from my grasp; it is 
only on the world to come that my hopesf 480 now repose. 
Hearken not, I pray your Highness, to words that have not the 
truth in them. If your Highness shall listen to such words, you 
cannot but regret "it in the end. And let not your Highness 
yield to the lusts of the flesh, for many are the princes whose 
kingdoms have been brought to nought by Almighty God because 
they yielded to their fleshly lusts." 

Thereupon Bendahara Paduka Raja returned to the Mercy 
of God, and he was buried by Sultan Ala'u'd-din according to the 
custom for bendaharas. And Tun Perpateh Puteh, younger 
brother of Bendahara Paduka Raja, was made Bendahara in his 
stead by Sultan Ala'u'd-din: he was known as Bendahara Puteh. 
Bendahara Puteh had a son, Tun Abu Saiyit, who was a good- 
looking man. This Tun Abu Saiyit had two sons; the elder had 
the title of Sri Amar Bangsa, the younger was called Tun Muham¬ 
mad. He had two sons, Tun Udan and Tun Sulit, and two 
daughters, of whom one was the mother of Tun Hamzah and the 
other was the mother of Dato' Darat. Tun Muhammad was, 
forf 481 a Malay, a learned man; he had a smattering of Arabic 
grammar and syntax and canon law and some slight knowledge 
of doctrinal theology. 

Chapter XV 

The quarrel between Haru and Pasai and the cause of it. 
The ruler of Haru (for no specified reason) orders a raid on the 
outlying territories of Malacca. The raiders are defeated, 
thanks to the bravery of the Sri Bija ‘diraja and Tun Isak 
Berakah. Sultan Ala'u’d-din orders an attack on Kampar (here 
also no reason is given). It is successful and Sultan Ala'u’d-din 
puts in his son, Raja Menawar, as ruler of Kampar. The death 
of Sultan Ala'u’d-din. He is succeeded by his son Raja Mamat 
(sic), who becomes Sultan Mahmud Shah. The Sri Bija diraja 
incurs his displeasure and is put to death., The incident of 

3952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



120 


The Malay Annals 


(145—146] 


Tun Bayajit. The Sriwa Raja is a great favourite. His 
oddities. Only the loyalty of Malays, to their rulers saves 
Sultan Mahmud from death at the hands of an injured husband. 
The Sriwa Raja's uncanny power over elephants and horses. 
Handsome Raja Zainu'l-‘Abidin and the debauchery of 
Malacca. The conquest of Kelantan. (Shellabear, chapter XXIV 
as far as the top of page 148; then chapter XVII up to first paragraph 
of page 149; then chapter XXVI). 

Here now is a story of Haru. The Raja of Haru was called 
Maharara ‘diraja: he was a son of Sultan Sajak who traced his 
descent from the Rockf 482 (which seemed to be upstream if one 
was descending the stream and downstream if one was going 
up—Sh.). Maharaja ‘diraja sent an embassy to Pasai: the envoy 
was Raja Pahlawanf 483 . When he reached Pasai, the letter was 
borne in procession and taken to the hall of audience. It was 
duly received by the letter-reader, who then read it. Now what 
was written in the letter was, “the younger brother presents his 
greetings:” but what was read was, “the younger brother presents 
his obeisance to his elder brother.” Raja Pahlawan thereupon 
observed, “The letter says one] 484 thing but you are reading 
another!” The reader however persisted in reading “the younger 
brother presents his obeisance to his elder brother.” Once again 
Raja Pahlawan said, “The letter says one thing but you are reading 
another.” (And he added) Let me die here in Pasai and not 
in Haru! Even if I am to be eaten by the dogs of Pasai, they 
shall] 485 know how to say the right word!” And when yet again 
the man read the letter as before. Raja Pahlawan flew into a 
rage and ran amuck, killing any number of Pasai men. There¬ 
upon the men of Pasai killed Raja Pahlawan and his Haru 
followers: and that was the cause of the feud between Pasai and 
Haru. Afterwards Maharaja ‘diraja ordered hisf 48fi war-chief Sri 
Indra to lay waste the outlying districts of Malaka] 487 . At that 
time from Tanjong Tuan to Jugra there was a continuous line 
of dwelling-houses; this was the stretch of coast that was ravaged 
by the men of Haru. 

When Sultan Ala’u’d-din heard of this, he ordered the Paduka 
Tuan, son of Bendahara Paduka Raja, to intercept the Haru fleet, 
and the Laksamana, the Sri Bijaya (?Bija) ‘diraja and all the 
war-chiefs were ordered to accompany the Paduka Tuan. The 
Paduka Tuan and the war-chiefs accordingly set out and when 
the Malaka fleet reached Tanjong Tuan waters, they encountered 
the fleet of Haru and battle was joined. The din of the fighting 
was like the crack of doom. But the Haru fleet so greatly out¬ 
numbered the fleet of Malaka that for one ship of the Sri Bija 
‘diraja’s there were three ships of Haru: and weapons fell like 
rain. Men of Haru attacked the ship of the Sri Bija ‘diraja and 
the ship of the Sri Bija ‘diraja was worsted and the crew jumped 
overboard. At that moment Tun Isak Berakah, son of Tun 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



translated by C. C. Brown 


121 


[146—147] Pekerma Wira, grandson of the Paduka Tuan and great-grandson 
of Bendahara Paduka Raja, came aboard the Sri Bija 'diraja's 
ship. He and the Sri Bija 'diraja did not jump overboard like 
the crew but stood fast in the ship, though the men of Ilaru 
had boarded it and made themselves masters of half the forepart 
of the vessel. And Tun Isak said to the Sri Bija 'diraja, "Now 
then, chief, let us attack these Haru men!" But the Sri Bija 
'diraja replied, "Wait a while." When the Haru men had advanc¬ 
ed as far as the mainmast, Tun Isak cried, "Come, let us attack!" 
But the Sri Bija 'diraja answered, "It's not the moment yet." 
By this time the men of Haru had come as far as the well (?)f 488 
of the ship, and again Tun Isak cried, "Come, chief, let us attack!" 
But the Sri Bija 'diraja replied, "Wait awhile, my friend, it's 
not yet the right moment", and he went into the cabinf 489 . Then 
said Tun Isak, "For shame! I thought this Sri Bija 'diraja was a 
brave man and that is why I came aboard his ship! Had I but 
known he was a coward, I should have done better to go aboard 
the ship of the Laksamana!" And now the men of Haru had 
penetrated as far as the entrance to the covered part of the ship, 
when the Sri Bija 'diraja came out and said to Tun Isak, "Now 
then, Che’ Isak, come on! The moment has arrived!" Tun 
Isak .agreed, and the two of them fell upon the enemy. The 
men of Haru broke and fled and jumped over board. Some of 
them retreated to their own ship, pursued by the Sri Bija 'diraja 
and Tun Isak who boardedf 490 the ship and captured it. And 
the crew of the Sri Bija 'diraja's ship who had taken to the water 
came back on board. The Sri Bija 'diraja then ordered a general 
attack, and the Haru line of battle was broken and the ships 
fled, to be pursued by the men of Malaka who attacked once 
more. This time the Haru men fled back to their Raja. And 
when Maharaja 'diraja heard of the defeat of his fleet, he flew into 
a rage and cried, "Put me on my elephantf 491 "Betong", then if 
it was Malaka I was fighting, the whole of Malaka (would be no 
match for me): if it was Pasai, the whole of Pasai (would be no 
match for me! Only the powerf 492 of God should prevent me 
from charging down the fort of Malaka with this elephant 
"Betong" of mine!" So saying he ordered another attack on the 
men of Malaka and the men of Haru set out to attack. By this 
time the Malaka fleet had reached Pengkalan Dungun (?), where 
they stopped and the men went ashore to relieve nature. Now 
there was a Malaka Tamil called Mir Duzul who was of the 
party, and he landed like the others. Presently he encountered 
an old he-goat which to him looked like a man. Mir Duzul was 
startled and fled, fell sprawling, got up again and ran panting 
after others. And they were alarmed at the sight of Mir Duzul 
rushingf 493 wildly after them like that, and thev asked him what 
was the matter. And he replied, "I met an old Haru man just 
now. I Iiuduf 494 and he dzufulf" When they heard this, they 

J952] Royal Asiatic Society . 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



122 


The Malay Annals 

[147—148] all advanced inland, weapons in hand, and when they came to- 
the place, they saw it was an old he-goat and not a man. And 
they all burst out laughing and said, "Damn this Mir Duzul,. 
what fools he has made of us!” They all then returned to their 
ships. And the Haru fleet appeared and met the fleet of 
Malaka: and battle was engaged, amid unimaginable din and 
with arrows falling like heavy rain. And the men of Malaka 
drove their ships right at the enemy, at the same time pouring 
a streamf 495 of darts on them, and the Haru fleet broke and beat 
a hasty retreat up the river. The Paduka Tuan and the war- 
chiefs then set out for Malaka, and when in due course they 
arrived there, they presented themselves before Sultan AlaVd-din, 
who was well pleased to hear of the Malaka victory and rewarded 
the Paduka Tuan, the Laksamana, the Sri Bija 'diraja and the 
war-chiefs, all of them being given robes of honour. 

Some time afterwards the Sri Bija 'diraja died, leaving two 
sons, one of whom, Tun Kuduf 490 (?) was given the title of 
Sri Bija 'diraja, while the other received the title of Tun Bija 
'diraja: it was he who was the father of Sang Setia: the thirdf 49T 
child (was a daughter). 

And Sultan AlaVd-din ordered a fleet to be made ready for 
the conquest of Kamparf 497a , under the command of the Sri Nara 
'diraja. When it was ready, the Sri Nara 'diraja set forth accom¬ 
panied by Sang Stia, Sang Naya and the war-chiefs. Ikhtiar Muluk 
also accompanied the Sri Nara 'diraja. And when they reached 
Kampar, (word was brought to the Raja?) [Now the Raja of 
Kampar was called Maharaja Jaya: he was descended from the 
Raja of Pagar Ruyong and Pekan Tua was his city.] And when 
the Raja of Kampar heard that the Sri Nara 'diraja was come to 
attack Kampar, he commanded his chief minister, Tun Damang; 
as he was called, to assemble the forces. Tun Damang set forth 
accordingly to do his bidding and the forces were assembled 
complete with weapons. Then the Sri Nara 'diraja arrived and 
the men of Malaka landed. And Maharaja Jaya went out to 
resist the attack; he was mounted on an elephant and Turr 
Damang armed with a spear marched beside the elephant. When 
the men of Malaka met the men of Kampar, some stabbed at 
each other with spears, some hacked at each other with battle- 
axes, some shot at each other with arrows. Many were killed on 
either side and blood flowed like a river over the ground. 

So stronglyf 498 did the men of Malaka attack the men of 
Kampar (that the men of Kampar gave ground). When Maha¬ 
raja Jaya and Tun Damang saw this, they forthwith dashedf 4 "’ 
in and attacked the men of Malaka (? wadingt 500 in blood and) 
leaving mounds of corpses wherever they attacked. The men of 
Malaka retreated to the water's edge, save only the Sri Nara 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 




123 


translated by C. C. Brown 

t 148 — 14 ®1 'diraja and Ikhtiar Muluk who stood their ground and refused 
to budge. And when Maharaja Jaya and Tun Damang (? 
attacked! 501 again) together with all the Kampar fighting men 
showering their weapons like rain, the Sri Nara 'diraja cried to 
Maharaja Jaya, "Your Highness, I ask for this piece of ground on 
which I stand. If your Highness persists! 502 in trying to take 
it from me, then I will present (at your heart) this spear which 
your Highness’ elder brother gave me!” Tun Damang then 
stabbed Ikhtiar Muluk through the shoulder with his spear. And 
Ikhtiar Muluk took his headcloth (and handed it) to the Sri 
Nara 'diraja, saying, "I have been wounded, chief”, whereupon 
the Sri Nara 'diraja bandaged the wound. Ikhtiar Muluk, who 
was armed with a bow! 503 of the Persian (?) type (?), then shot 
Tun Damang clean! 504 through the temples and Tun Damang 
fell on his face beside the elephant of Maharaja Jaya. When 
Maharaja Jaya saw that Tun Damang had been killed, he drove 
his elephant at the Sri Nara 'diraja: and the Sri Nara 'diraja with 
the spear he had in his hand stabbed Maharaja Java right through 
the chest, so that Maharaja Jaya fell from his elephant and died. 
When the men of Kampar saw that Maharaja Jaya and Tun 
Damang had been killed, they broke and fled, followed by the 
men of Malaka who killed them as the fled and then! 5 ’ 5 burst 
(?) into the fort. After the men of Malaka had thoroughly 
looted the city, the Sri Nara 'diraja returned crowned with 
victory to Malaka, where he arrived in due course and presented 
himself before Sultan Ala’u’d-din. And the king was well pleased 
to hear of the victory over Kampar, and he gave robes of honour 
to the Sri Nara 'diraja and Ikhtiar Muluk. [Ikhtiar Muluk begat 
(? the father of) Khoja Bulan, who begat Khoja Muhammad Shah; 
and he was appointed to stand on the same step leading up to the 
throne as the heralds] And Kampar was handed over to the Sri 
Nara 'diraja, and it was he who first established a Governor 
of Kampar. 

The king then ordered the Sri Nara 'diraja to go to Kampar 
to install his son Menawarf 500 Shah as Raja, with the Sri Amarf 507 
Miraja as his Bendahara. The Sri Nara 'diraja went accordingly to 
Kampar and installed Sultan Menawar Shah as Raja of Kampar, 
whereafter he returned to Malaka and presented himself before the 
Sultan. 

And when the king had reigned for thirty-three years, then in 
the process of time he fell sick. And when he realised that his 
'days were numbered, he sent for his son Raja Mamatf 508 and his 
■chiefs. And when they had all come, the king asked the women 
attendants to prop him up; and of those who had assembled he 
ordered five—the Bendahara, the Treasurer, the Temenggong, 
Kadli Menawar Shah and the Laksamana—to approach his bedside. 

3952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



124 


The Malay Annals 

E 149 — 15 °] Then he said to them, "I would have you know, my friends, that 
I feel my end to be approaching. If I die, it is my son, Raja Mat 
here, that I wish you to make Raja in my stead. Take good care 
of him and love him as you have loved me. If he is guilty of 
errors and follies, be generous in pardoning them: and watchf 509 
over him, for he is only a child/' 

And when they heard these words of Sultan Ala'u'd-din, tears 
streamed from their eyes, though they were not aware of them; 
and weeping they said “May God lengthen the days of your 
Highness, for we have not yet had our fill of serving you. But if, 
thought 510 God forbid it, the flower in your Highness' grasp should 
wither, then will we carry out the wishes of your Highness, for 
never would wef 511 do obeisance to another Raja." And the king 
was well pleased with what they said, and looking upon the face 
of his son Raja Mamat, he said to him, “Know well, my son, that 
this world will not endure. Yea, my son, all that liveth here upon 
earth cannot butf 512 die in the end; it is only the True Faith 
that endures for all time. When I am gone, be diligent in God's 
service; abstain from taking other men's goods unlawfully, for 
God's poor are all entrusted to your keeping. If they are in 
distress, be swift to help them. If they are victims of injustice, 
inquire diligently into the matter, so that in the day of Judgment 
Almighty God may not lay a heavy burden of responsibility upon 
you, for thus saith the Prophet (may God bless him and give him 
peace) Kulukum ra'in wakullukum mas’ulun min ra'iy-yatihi, 
which means 'all ye who tend will be questioned as to yourf 513 
tending : that is to say, all rulers will be questioned by God as 
to the manner in which they have tended their subjects. There¬ 
fore it is your bounden duty to do justice and be diligent in 
inquiry so that some day in the world to come you may be taken 
into God's loving care for all eternity. See to it that you consult 
with your ministers and chiefs, for no ruler, however great his 
wisdom and understanding, shall prosper or succeed in doing 
justice unless he consults with those in authority under him. 
For rulers are like fire and their ministers are like firewood, and 
fire needs wood to produce a flame: ar-ra'iyyatu jurthum-atun 
sultanun darakht , which means 'subjects are like roots and the 
ruler is like the tree'; without roots the tree cannot stand upright; 
so is it with rulers and their subjects. As for the Malays, however 
grievously they may offend, be not hasty in putting them to death 
except in cases where that penalty is ordered by the law of God, 
for the Malays are your clay] 514 as the Tradition says, 'AI-'abdu 
tinul-murabbi’, which being interpreted is 'the slave is as it 
were (? the clay of) his master'. If you put them to death when 
they have done no wrong, your kingdom will be brought to 
nought. Remember, my son, these my last injunctions to you and 
act upon themf 515 (?) so that God may grant to you the blessing 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



[150—151] 


translated by C. C. Brown 12 5" 

which should be yours as a ruler.” And Sultan Ala’u’d-din then 
died, passing from a perishable world to one that abideth. 'We* 
are God’s and to God we return/ 

And his son; Raja Mamat, reigned in his stead; his 
title as ruler was Sultan Mahmud Shah. He was a finely built 
man, there was none to compare with him. Even a creese of 
Malaka make of three spans’ length was for him but a 
secondary! 510 creese. And Bendahara Puteh said to the Sri 
Bija 'diraja (who had just arrived from Singapore)! 517 , "It was 
Sultan Ala’u’d-din’s dying wish that the Ruler we have now should 
succeed him on the throne.” And the Sri Bija 'diraja replied, "I 
did not hear his dying wish.” When Sultan Mahmud Shah came 
to hear of what the Sri Bija 'diraja had said, he made no comment 
but in his heart! 518 he bore a grudge against the Sri Bija ‘diraja. 
Sultan Mahmud Shah begat three children: the son was called 
Sultan Ahmad! 519 and it was he who was to succeed his father 
on the throne: the other two were daughters. 

Now the Sri Rama had died, and his son was appointed to 
succeed him in the office of Sri Rama and as Master of the King’s 
Elephants, with the same rank as his father. He had two sons r 
of whom one became Sri Nata and the other Tun Aria. Sri 
Nata begat Tun Bijayit Hitam, while Tun Aria begat Tun Mamat, 
who in his turn begat Tun Isahak Tun Pilu. 

It happened once that the Sri Bija ‘diraja did not appear at 
Malaka (on the eve of the Festival). He only arrived on the 
Festival day itself. And Sultan Mahmud Shah reprimanded the 
Sri Bija ‘diraja, saying, ‘‘Why were you not here in time, Sri 
Bija ‘cliraja? Do you not know the custom?” And the Sri Bija 
‘diraja answered, ‘‘I was late in starting. I did not expect the 
new moon would have been seen last night. But I realise that 
I was negligent and I can only ask your Highness to forgive me.” 
And Sultan Mahmud Shah said, ‘‘No, I know what is in your 
mind, Sri Bija ‘diraja, you do not like my being Raja.” He 
thereupon gave orders for the Sri Biija ‘diraja to be put to 
death. And when the men who were to put him to death came, 
the Sri Bija ‘diraja said to them, “What is my offence against the 
Ruler? Can it be that for the trifling offence I have committed 
I am to be put to death!” When Sultan Mahmud Shah was 
informed of what the Sri Bija ‘diraja had said, he replied, “If 
the Sri Bija ‘diraja does not know what his offence is, shew him 

this writing”. The writing set out four or five offences on the 

part of the Sri Bija ‘diraja, and when he had looked.at it he 

was silent. And he was put to death. It was to his son Sang 

Stia Bentayan that the fief of Singapura was given. 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



126 


The Malay Annals 

1151—152] One night Sultan Mahmud Shah went to the house of a 

woman named Tun Dewi: but when he found that Tun ‘Ali was 
already! 520 there he turned back. And looking behind him he 
perceived that among those escorting him was Tun Bayajit, (? 
grandfather of the Datok Muar). [This Tun Biyajit had two 
names: at Klang he was known as Tun Isak, whereas at Tembaga 
he went by the name of Tun Bayajit.] And Sultan Mahmud 
Shah tookf 521 sireh from his betel-caddy and gave it to Tun Bayajit. 
And Tun Bayajit thought to himself, "What might be the mean¬ 
ing of the Ruler giving me sireh like this? It looks as though he 
wants me to kill Tun ‘Ali Sandang!” For in by gone days sireh 
from the Raja's betel-caddy was highly esteemed, it was not given 
by him to all and sundry. Tun Bayajit accordingly went back 
to the house of Tun Dewi, where he stabbed Tun "Ali Sandang 
in the breast and killed him. ,After Tun ‘Ali Sandang had been 
killed Tun Bayajit left Tun Dewi's house and presented himself 
before Sultan Mahmud Shah. And there was great excitement, 
people crying that Tun ‘Ali had been killed by Tun Bayajit. And 
when the Sriwa Raja was informed, for Tun 'Ali was related to 
him, he was furious and ordered his people to waylay Tun Bavajit 
and kill him. Sultan Mahmud Shah thereupon ordered Tun 
Bayajit to make his escape. He did so and went to Pasai, where 
however he refused to do homage to the Raja, saying, "Bayajit 
does homage to none but Sultan Mahmud Shah." From Pasai 
he went to Haru, and there too he refused to do homage to the 
Raja. From there he went to Brunai, where also he refused to 
do homage to the Raja, though he married a daughter of the Raja 
and founded a family: whence comes it that the Datok Muar has 
many kinsmen in Brunai. And Tun Bayajit said, "In Malaka 
was Bayajit born, in Malaka shall he die!" So he returned to 
Malaka where he presented himself before Sultan Mahmud Shah. 
The king was dining at the time, and he ordered food to be 
brought for Tun Bayajit. And when they had eaten, the king 
embraced Tun Bayajit and kissed him. He then ordered him to 
be bound with a headcloth and sent to* the Sriwa Raja, for, 
thought Sultan Mahmud Shah, "If I bind Tun Bayajit and send 
him like that to the Sriwa Raja, he surely will not be killed by the 
Sriwa Raja." When Tun Bayajit was brought, the Sriwa Raja 
was mounted on his elephant; and the Raja's servant said to him, 
"Thus saith the Ruler: 'I send you Tun Bayajit. If he has done 
any wrong, we ask that he be forgiven.'" But when the Sriwa 
Raja saw Tun Bayajit, he drove his elephant-goad clean through 
t 521a the crown of Tun Bayajit's head and killed him. The Raja's 
servant then returned and informed Sultan Mahmud Shah that 
Tun Bayajit had died at the hand of the Sriwa Raja, who had killed 
him with an elephant-goad. But Sultan Mahmud Shah said not a 
word, for the Sriwa Raja was one of the king's chief favourites. At 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



translated by C. C. Brown 127 

[152—153] that time he had four favourites—the Sriwa Raja, Tun 'Omar, 
Hang 'Isa and Hang Husain Chengang. 

Now whenever Sultan Mahmud Shah went out for pleasure 
in the royal barge, he would stop on his way and send for the 
Sriwa Raja to accompany him. And though he would wait 
at the Sriwa Raja's landing-stage as long as it takes to cook 
pot after pot of rice, still the Sriwa Raja did not appear. For it 
was his habit, when a royal summons came, to go into his house 
and have a nap! Not till he was roused by the Raja's messenger 
would he get up, ease himself and have a bath. After his bath 
he would have a meal. After his meal he would don his sarong, 
and he would undo it twelve or thirteen times until he had 
got it to his liking. Then would come the jacket and the head- 
cloth, and the process with the sarong would be repeated with 
them until they too were to his liking. With the scarf also the 
same thing would happen; it would be put on and then undone 
again fourteen or fifteen times until it was to his liking. After 
that he would get as far as the door of the house when he would 
go back to his wife and ask her to tell him if there 
was anything amiss with his clothes. If she said that 
there was something not yet altogether right, he would 
undo the offending thing and set it to rights. Then 
at last he would leave the house, but when he had reach¬ 
ed the garden, he would go back to the house again and 
swing in his hammock if you please! It was not until the 
Raja’s servant bade him hurry that he would leave the house 
and join the Raja. But if the Raja wanted the Sriwa Raja 
to come quickly, he would send Tun Isak Berakah to cab him. 
As soon as Tun Isak reached the house, he would say, “Chief,, 
the Raja calls you." The Sriwa Raja would say "Very well' 
and forthwith go into the house. But Tun Isak knew the Sriwa 
Raja's ways, and he would ask for a mat so that he could lie down 
on the verandah. Then he would shout, "Tell the Chief I would 
like some rice, I'm hungry": and rice would be provided forth¬ 
with by the Sriwa Raja. Then when Tun Isak had eaten he 
would say that he was thirsty and might he have something? 
And the Sriwa Raja would say, "The Raja has only to send Tun 
Isak here and there's no end to what he wants!. Bring me my 
clothes!" The Sriwa Raja would then don forthwith his sarong, 
jacket, headcloth, creese and scarf, leave the house and make his 
way to join Sultan Mahmud Shah, with whom he was such a 
favourite that Sultan Mahmud Shah would tolerate any sort 
of behaviour from him. 

To shew how fond Sultan Mahmud Shah was of the Sriwa 
Raja, one day he sent for him, Tun 'Omar, Hang 'Isa and Hang 
Husain Chengang; and when the four of them presented them- 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



128 


The Malay Annals 


T153—154] selves before him, he said to them, “What would you have of 
us? Ask, that we may give it to you, for whatever it may be I 
(sic) will not refuse it.” The first to prefer a request was the 
Sriwa Raja, who said, “If it please your Highness, I would fain 
ask that I may be made Master of Elephants.” And Sultan 
Mahmud Shah answered, “We would gladly grant your request, 
but what are we to do? The Sri Rama still holds that appoint¬ 
ment and howf 522 should we take it from him when he has done 
nothing to justify our dismissing him? When he dies, it shall 
be you, Sriwa Raja, that we appoint to be Master of Ele¬ 
phants.” Tun 'Omar then made his request, “If it please your 
highness, I would fain ask to be made Sea Lord.” And Sultan 
Mahmud Shah replied, “Very good; but the Laksamana still 
holds that office, how aref 523 we to take it from him? He has 
done nothing to warrant our dismissing him. When the Lak¬ 
samana is gone, it is you, Tun 'Omar, that we shall appoint to 
be Sea Lord.” When Hang 'Isa and Hang Husain Chengang 
saw that neither the Sriwa Raja nor Tun 'Omar had obtained 
his request at the Raja's hands, bo.th of them reflected awhile. 
And Sultan Mahmud Shah said to Hang 'Isa and Hang Husain 
Chengang, “And you, what is it you wish for? Ask it of me.” 
And Hang 'Isa answered, “If it please your Highness, I would 
fain ask for gold to the amount of thirteen tahilsf 524 . and cloth 
to the amount of four packs. (?)” This the king gave him there 
and then. Hang Husain Chengang then preferred his request, 
“If it please your Highness, I would fain ask for about a dozen 
buffaloes with calves and twelve orchards.” This too was granted 
by the king. 

It happened once that Sultan Mahmud Shah was having an 
intrigue with the wife of Tun Bayajit, the Laksamana's son, 
taking advantage of Tun Bayajit's absence from the house on a 
visit to his fief. One night he went to the house of Tun 
Bayajit 7 s wife, and on the morrow at dawn he was hastening back 
when he met Tun Bayajit on his way up from the river with 
a large number of followers whereas Sultan Mahmud Shah had 
but few men with him. Tun Bayajit realised that Sultan Mahmud 
Shah was come from his house and had he wanted to take his 
life there and then, he could have done so. But because 
as a Malay subject he would not waver in his loyalty to the Raja, 
he merely balanced his spear in his hand and said, “So that is how 
you behave, Sultan Mahmud Shah! Alas that you are my master! 
Were you not, assuredly I would, drive this spear of mine through 
your heart!” And when the Raja's servants were for attacking 
Tun Bayajit, the king said to them “Hold your hands! What 
he says is right, I have donef 524a him a wrong for which by the law 
of God he could take my life. It is only because he is a Malay 
subject who refuses to waver in his loyalty that he behaves as he 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



129 


translated by C. C. Brown 

[ 154 — 155 ] is behaving now.” The king then returned to the palace. As 
for Tun Bayajit he divorced his wife and refused to appear at 
court or undertake any further court duties. Sultan Mahmud 
Shah attempted to mollify him by sending him Tun Iram Sendari, 
one of his mistresses. Tun Bayajit accepted her but still refused 
to go to court on publicf 524b occasions. 

It happened once that the Sriwa Raja was going to marry the 
daughter of Kadli Menawar Shah, grandson! 525 (sic) of Maulana 
Yusuf, and the wedding festivities were started. And when 
the propitious moment arrived, the Sriwa Raja went in procession 
to the wedding, mounted on Sultan Mahmud Shah's riding 
elephant Balidamsai. Tun 'Abdu'l-Karim, Kadli Menawar Shah's 
son, was on the elephant’s head, Tun Zainal 'Abidin sat on the 
one side of the packsaddle to balance the Sriwa Raja and the 
Sri Awadanaf 520 sat on the elephant's croup; and the procession 
made its way to the house of Kadli Menawar Shah. Now Kadli 
Menawar Shah was waiting on his land with fireworks and 
maroons, and the gate of the fence round his land was shut. 
And Kadli Menawar Shah said, "If the Sriwa Raja can make his 
way in, he shall have my daughter. If he can't, there'll be no 
wedding, even if I have to lose all that I have spent on it!” 
When the Sriwa Raja's elephant reached the gate, Kadli Menawar 
Shah ordered the fireworks and maroons to be let off; and what 
with that noise, the noise of the shouting and the noise of the 
musical instruments, the din was so terrific that Balidamsai was 
startled and bolted, despite all the efforts of Tun 'Abdul'l-Karim to 
hold him. When the Sriwa Raja saw what was happening, he 
said to Tun ‘Abdul'l-Karim, "Shift to the middle and let me 
mount his head”. So Tun 'AbduTKarim moved to the middle 
and the Sriwa Raja to the elephant's head, whereupon the Sriwa 
Raja turned Balidamsai and drove him at Kadli Menawar Shah s 
gate. In vain did the fireworks and maroons explode, Balidamsai 
took no notice of them and crashed through the gate up to the 
pavilion, where he was brought to a halt. The Sriwa Raja then 
leapt down on to the floor of the pavilion and the wedding took 
place, in the presence of Sultan Mahmud Shah. After the 
wedding came the feast, and Sultan Mahmud Shah then returned 
to his palace. 

Now Kadli Menawar Shah was exceedingly skilled in the use 
of the sword called beladau*, for he had had lessons with the 
weapon from the Rajaf 527 of the Moluccas when the latter came 
to do homage at Malaka in the time of Sultan Ala'u'd-din. When 
Kadli Menawar Shah had company, the verandah on which they 
sat had a trellis and Kadli Menawar Shah would like his visitors 
how many! 528 strips of the trel lis they would like him to cut 

* a curved single-edged dagger (W.), but possibly here a sword 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society - 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 





130 


The Malay Annals 


[ 155 — 156 ] through with a single cut. If they said two, he would cut 
through two; if they said three, he would cut through three, or 
.as many as they chose to say. 

After the Sriwa Raja had been married for some time to 
Kadli Mena war Shah's daughter, he had a son, Tun 'Omar by 
name: he was given the title of Sri Petam and was known as the 
Chief of Rembat (?). The Sri Petam had many children, of 
whom the eldest was called Tun Daud. It was he who was the 
Chief of the Coastward territory. Another son was called Tun 
'Ali Sandang, he was the father of the woman Chief of 
Muar. Another son was called Tun Bentan, he was the father 
of Tun Mai: another son was called Tun Hamzah, he was the 
father of (Tun) Mandurah: another son was called Tun Tukah, 
he was the father of (Tun) 'Omar who died in Petani: and there 
were many sons besides these; I do not mention them all here. 

The Sriwa Raja had an uncanny knowledge of elephants and 
horses. He had a favourite white pony which he stabled in a 
bay of the gallery of his house. If any one wanted to borrow 
this pony for a ride in the moonlight, the Sriwa Raja would lend 
it: but no sooner had the borrower ridden the pony two or three 
courses than the pony would turn round and bring himf 529 back 
to its stablef 530 . It was only Tun Isak Berakahf 531 that could 
borrow the pony as he wished. When he borrowed it and had 
been brought back to the stable after two or three courses, he 
would say to the Sriwa Raja's attendants, "Tell the Chief I am 
thirsty and will he please give me something." The Sriwa Raja 
would do as he asked. When he had had what he wanted, Tun 
Isak Berakah would say, "Can I take the pony out again for 
another ride?" And when the Sriwa Raja agreed, Tun Isak 
Berakah would ride the pony two or three courses and the pony 
would bring him back again to the Sriwa Raja's house. 
Whereupon Tun Isak Berakalr would say to the Sriwa Raja's 
attendants, "Tell the Chief I am hungry and will he please let me 
have some rice." And the Sriwa Raja would provide rice. After 
he had eaten Tun Isak Berakah would again go out and after he 
had ridden the pony two or three courses, back the pony would 
bring him again. Tun Isak Berakah would then ask for some¬ 
thing which gave the Sriwa Raja some trouble to provide, where¬ 
upon the Sriwa Raja would say, "Tun Isakf 532 has only to come 
here and there's no end to what he wants! Tell him to take 
the pony for as long as he wants and ride it the whole night!" 
TunTsak Berakah would then take the pony and ride it the whole 
f532a night. • 

One day there came to Malaka a Pathan who was an expert 
horseman, and Sultan Mahmud Shah had him sent to the Sriwa 
'Raja with the message that he was a good rider. And the Sriwa 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



translated by C. C. Brown 131 

[156 157 ] R a j a sa j^ “Can you ride, Khoja?” And when the Pathan replied 

that he could, the Sriwa Raja said to him, "Try this pony of 
mine 0 , and he ordered the pony to be saddled and bridled. The 
Pathan then mounted the pony and applied his spurs. And 
the Sriwa Raja said, "Give him a touch of the whip, Khoja.” So 
the Pathan applied the whip and was promptly thrown head over 
heels. And the Sriwa Raja said, "Hullo, Khoja, what’s happened 
to you?” He then shouted for his son 'Omar, and when 'Omar 
appeared, the Sriwa Raja said to him, "Give the pony a touch of 
the whip, my lad!” Tun 'Omar did so and the pony began to 
dance. And the Pathan was astounded by this display *of the 
Sriwa Raja’s skill with horses. 

The Tun 'Omar whof 533 was a favourite of Sultan Mahmud 
Shah was a son of the Sri Bija 'diraja, the 'Chief with a stoop’, and 
he was a great fighter. It was this Tun 'Omar whose masterf 534 
guaranteed that he would never be killed by an enemy’s weapon, 
and that was why he was utterly reckless and took no account 
of any adversary. As for Hangf 535 'Isa the 'Nimble’, he shewed 
remarkable agility in everything that he did. There was a tree 
trunk that he used as a bridge to get him across the Malaka river, 
rolling it on the surface of the water first this way, then that,, 
though if any one else trod it in that way, the trunk would sink 
so that the man was up to his ankles in water. But if Hang 'Isa 
Pantas was going that way, he would tread the trunk so that it 
rolled from right to left, then he would tread it so that it rolled 
from left to right; and in this way he would get right across the 
river without so much as wetting his instep! As for Hang Husain 
Chengang, when he was being married to the daughter of Hang 
Usoh and when after the wedding the ceremonial rice was 
served and the bride and bridegroom had each taken three 
mouthfuls of rice, the servants then made to remove the dish, but 
he seized it, saying, "Leave it where it is! Yourf 536 daughter may 
have had all the rice she wants, (Hang Usoh,) but I want some 
more, this wedding has cost me a lot of money!” And all the 
women who heard what he said burst out laughing. Hang, 
Husain Chengang went on eating until he had cleared the dish, 
whereupon the dish was removed and Hang Husain went into 
the house and betook himself to the bridal chamber. 

Now Sultan Mahmud Shah wished to receive instruction iir 
the sciences from Maulana Yusuf. [He (Maulanaf 537 Yusuf) 
had become a reclusef 538 . If people flew kites over the roof of 
his house, he would order them to be shotf 539 down: and when 
he got one, he would order the cord of the kite to be wound in, 
saying, "How dare people fly kites over my house!” That was how 
he behaved. He had ceased to be Kadli, having been succeeded 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



132 


The Malay Annals 

[ 157 — 158 ] in that office by his son, Kadli Menawar Shah.] In pursuance 
of this intention Sultan Mahmud Shah set out for the house of 
Maulana Yusuf: he was mounted on his elephant and escorted 
by his retainers. When they reached the fence round Maulana 
Yusuf’s house, the retainers said to the gatekeeper, “Tell Maulana 
Yusuf that Sultan Mahmud Shah, the Ruler, is here.” But when 
this message was brought to Maulana Yusuf, he said, “Shut the 
gate! What business has Sultan Mahmud Shah to come to a 
fakir’s house?” When Sultan Mahmud Shah was told what 
Maulana Yusuf had said, he returned to the palace. But when 
night fell, he dismissed his retainers and when he was alone, 
he set out again for Maulana Yusuf’s house, this time with no 
one but a boy for escort and himself carrying his book. On 
arriving at the gate the king said to the gate-keeper, “Tell 
Maulana Yusuf that Mahmud the fakir is come”. And the gate¬ 
keeper opened the gate, thinking it was only right that onef 540 
fakir should come to another fakir’s house. Forthwith Maulana 
Yusuf came out and brought Sultan Mahmud Shah into the 
house and bade him be seated. Sultan Mahmud Shah then had 
his lesson (? in the sciences) t r,40a with Maulana Yusuf. 

We come now to Raja Zainal-'Abidin, brother of Sultan 
Mahmud Shah, who was so handsome that he had no rival in 
• those days. His looks were flawless and his every movement a 
miracle of beauty and grace] 341 . If he wore] 342 his sarong in 
the overlapping fashion, the overlap was sof 343 adjusted as to 
display its perfection. He had a pony called Ambangan of which 
he was so fond that he cleared a bay of his house adjoining his 
own sleeping-chamber and there he stabled the pony. And he 
would rouse himself two or three times during the night (? to 
visit the pony) f 544 When Raja Zainal-'Abidin was going out riding 
and had dressed, he would rub scent by thef 344a bowlful on the 
pony’s coat before he went out for his ride. And such was the 
excitement which his passing caused in the market that married 
women and even young girls kept in seclusion would rush with 
one accord to get a sight of Sultan (sic) Zainal-’Abidin, some 
looking from their doorways, some looking through the lattices, 
some looking through the windows, some looking from the roof, 
some making peepholes in the house wall, some climbing on to 
the top of the fence. As for the passion of the women for Raja 
Zainal-‘Abidin, it was past concealing: and as for the scores of 
boxes of ripe betel-leaf, some of the leaves rolled into pellets and 
others arranged separately in rows—they can well be imagined. 
The perfumes, the spikenard in caskets by the hundred—the musk 
for bathing, the nosegays of frangipanni, the trayfuls of jasmine, 
the posies—need they be described? Raja Zainal-‘Abidin would 
take any woman that was to his liking, and those that were not 
he would give to the youths around him: and great was the 
debauchery in Malaka in those days. 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



[ 158 — 159 ] 


translated by C. C. Brown 133 

When Sultan Mahmud Shah came to hear how Raja Zainal- 
‘ Abidin was behaving, he was grievously displeased with his 
brother; but he nursed his anger in his heart and did not display 
it. Presently however he sent for the retainers he could best 
trust: and when they were come, he said to them, "Which of 
you can I count on to kill Raja ZainaL Abidin so that no one 
shall know of it?” But none of them would undertake the task. 
There was however a gate-keeper, Hang Berkat by name, (who) 
in the presence of the Raja had declared his unwillingness! 545 to 
undertake the task; but when he was sent for privately by Sultan 
Mahmud Shah) he undertook to do it. And Sultan Mahmud 
Shah said! 540 ("If you make good your word, I will own you as a 
brother”).. .and the Kelantan line! 547 was broken (and the fort of 
Kelantan fell), and the men of Malaka entered the fort and 
sacked! 548 it. The three daughters of the Raja of Kelantan were 
captured; one was called Otang Kentang, one Cherpa and the 
third Cherbok: all three were taken to Malaka by the Sri Maha¬ 
raja. When he reached Malaka the Sri Maharaja presented himself 
before Sultan Mahmud Shah and offered the three princesses to 
him. The king was well pleased to hear of the defeat of Kelantan 
and bountifully rewarded the Sri Maharaja and all who had gone 
on the expedition. The three princesses were kept in the place, 
and Sultan Mahmud Shah took one of them, Otang Kentang, as 
consort. By her he had three children, the eldest a daughter, 
the second a son called Raja Nara and the youngest a daughter 
Later Sultan Mahmud Shah took another consort, Tun Birah, 
daughter of the Laksamana, and by her he had a daughter called 
Raja Dewi. 

God knoweth the truth 


Chapter XVI 


In Kampar Sultan Menawar (ton of Sultan Ala’u’d-in of 
Malacca) diet and it tucceeded by hit son Abdullah. He comet 
to Malacca to vitit Sultan Mahmud, who marries him to hit 
daughter and makes him Sultan ‘Abdullah of Kampar. . Death 
of Bendahara Puteh. He is tucceeded by Sri Maharaja Tun 
Mutahir, who becomes Bendahara Sri Maharaja and is described 
as the ‘grandest of all the Bendaharas*. The prosperity of 
Malacca under his administration. The affair of Pateh Adam 
and Tun Menida. 

(Shellabear, chapter XXVI) 


Here now is a story of Kampar, where Menawar Shah, Raja 
of Kampar, had died, leaving a son named Raja ‘Abdullah. Raja 
‘Abdullah came to Malaka to do homage and Sultan Mahmud 
Shah took him for his son-in-law, marrying him to his daughter, 
the sister of Raja Ahmad. He then ordered that Raja Abdullah 
should be proclaimed Raja of Kampar (with the title of Sultan 
‘Abdullah). Sultan ‘Abdullah then returned to Kampar. 


1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



134 


The Malay Annals 


l 159 — 160 1 In the course of time Bendahara Puteh departed this life r 

and Sultan Mahmud Shah carried out the funeral rites customary 
on the death of a Bendahara. After the funeral Sultan Mahmud 
Shah called together those who were eligible to be made Benda¬ 
hara: first Tun Zainal-Abidin, second Tun Telanai, third the 
Padukaf 549 Tuan, fourth the Sri Nara 'diraja, fifth the Sriwa 
Raja, sixth the Sri Maharaja, seventh Abu Sayid, eighth Tun 
'Abdul and ninth Tun Bijaya Maha Mentri. And all nine 
of them stood in a row before the palace of Sultan Mahmud 
Shah. And he said to them, "Which of all you chiefs is to 
become Bendahara? Whichever of you is (?the most)! 550 
eligible ( (?) shall be made Bendahara)/' And the Paduka Tuan 
answered, "Your Highness, all nine of those before you are 
eligible. Whichever is preferred by your Highness, he it is that 
shall be made Bendahara." And the motherf 551 of Sultan 
Mahmud Shah was listening behind the door r and she said 
to him; "Let it be Tun Mutahir." And Sultan Mahmud 
Shah then said to them, "Pa' Mutahir shall be Bendahara": 
and they all agreed. Robes of honour, such as are customary 
for Bendaharas, were then brought: and (in addition) 
he was given a betel-chestf 552 (?) complete! 553 with all 
accessories. It was the custom in ancient times, when a man 
was made Bendahara, or Treasurer or Temenggong or a minister 
of state, for him to be presented with a betel-chest complete with 
all accessories; save that in the case of the Treasurer or the 
Temenggong there was no pounder (?)f 554 , though the Benda¬ 
hara^ chest had a pounder and also an ink-flask. A Temenggong 
on appointment received a lance with a fringe (?)f 555 . 

When the Sri Maharaja had become Bendahara, the city of 
Malaka steadily increased in prosperity and in population, for 
Bendahara Sri Maharaja was exceedingly just and humane, clever 
f 55G in his handling of foreigners and skilled in conciliating 
jr>r>Ga j-] ie good will of the populace. So much so that in ships 
bound for Malaka from above the wind it was the custom, as 
the anchor was being weighed, for the master of the ship, after 
reciting the usual prayer, to say. "May we reach Malaka safely! 556 ® 
and see Pisang Jeram, the stream of Bukit China and Benda¬ 
hara Sri Maharaja!" And the crew would answer, "Ay, ay, sir!" 

Bendahara Sri Maharaja had many children. The eldest 
was a son called Tun Hasan. He was very handsome and well- 
built, and it was he who was made Temenggong in succession! 558 
to his father. It was the custom! 557 for the Temenggong to 
arrange the guests at food in the inner hall, When engaged 
upon this duty Temenggong Tun Hasan wore his sarong in the 
overlap fashion (?): he wore a scarf over his shoulders and his 
headress was of the ?. .. .type, with aigrettes and tassels. As he 
walked along the gangway arranging the guests at food he would 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 




translated by C. C. Brown 135 

1160 — 161 ] point this way and that with his fan after the manner of a fencing 
! 559 master! It was Tun Hasan Temenggong who introduced 
the long! 560 Malay jacket with loose sleeves. He had a son 
named Tun ‘Ali. 

One day when Bendahara Sri Maharaja was seated in his 
public hall with people before him, he asked those present, 
'‘Which is the better looking, Hasan or I ?" But when they 
replied that he was better looking than his son, Bendahara Sri 
Maharaja said, “No, gentlemen, for I have to wear spectacles. 
Hasan is better looking than I am, for he is a young man; but 
I move more gracefully than he does/' And they answered, “It 
may be as you say, Datok!" Bendahara Sri Maharaja was endowed 
by nature with good looks and he was moreover a great dandy. 
He would change his clothes seven times a day; he had a thou¬ 
sand jackets of one sort or another; his headcloths stood ready 
tied on blocks, twenty or thirty of them in constant use; and he 
had a full-length looking-glass. When Bendahara Sri Maharaja 
was dressing, after he had put on sarong, jacket, creese and scarf, 
he would askf 561 his wife, “Which headcloth do you think would 
go best with this suit?" And the Bendahara Perempuan would 
say, “Such and such a headcloth would go best", and her advice 
would be taken by Bendahara Sri Maharaja. 

The Bendahara had another son called Tun Bayajit Rupat, 
and another called Tun Lela Wangsa. His daughter, Tun 
Tanggal (?), was maried to Tun Abu Sayit, son of the Awadana, 
and Tun Hasan was born of that marriage. 

Bendahara Sri Maharaja was the grandest! 502 of all the 
Bendaharas. If he was seated in his public hall with people 
before him and a prince appeared, he would not leave! 563 
his seat but would merely hold out his hand and invite the 
prince to come up into the hall. It was only for an heir-apparent 
to the throne that he would leave his seat, though if the Raja of 
Pahang appeared, Bendahara Sri Maharaja would stand up and 
the Raja of Pahang would come up in to the hall and seat himself 
beside Bendahara Sri Maharaja. Now the Sri Nara ‘diraja, Tun 
Tahir, elder brother of Bendahara Sri Maharaja, who was also 
Treasurer, had five children; three sons, Tun ‘Ali, Tun Hamzah 
and Tun Mahmud, and two daughters, one of whom was called 
Tun Kudu. She was a handsome woman and was one of Sultan 
Mahmud Shah's consorts. He was very fond of her and ordered 
that she be called “Datok Tuan" at court though among all her 
hinsfolk she was known as “Datok Puteh." 

Tun ‘Abdul, the younger brother of Bendahara Sri Maha¬ 
raja, had many children, a number of sons and a number of 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society . 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



136 


The Malay Annals 

D 61 — 162 1 daughters; one of the daughters was married to Tun Rana by whom 
she had a son, Tun Hiaap Panjang, who became Datok Jawa; 
and one of the sons was Tun Minda who was adopted by the 
Sri Nara 'diraja. 

Now the Chief of Surabaya, Pateh Adam by name, came 
to Malaka to do homage. He was given robes of honour by 
Sultan Mahmud Shah and in the hall of audience was assigned 
a place on a level with the ministers of state. One day Pateh 
Adam was sitting on the Sri Maharaja (? Sri Nara 'diraja)'s 
balcony and it happened that Tun Sinai, f 5(34 who was still a 
child and could just run a few steps, was toddling about in front 
of the Sri Nara 'diraja. And the Sri Nara 'diraja said to Pateh 
Adam, "Just listen to what my child says! She wants you for a 
husband, it seems!" And Pateh Adam bowed his head and did 
obeisance, saying, "Sof 565 be it." And when the season came 
for the return voyage to Java, Pateh Adam sought leave from 
Sultan Mahmud Shah to depart, and he was given by Sultan 
Mahmud Shah robes of honour appropriate to his rank. Pateh 
Adam then purchased a little girl of the same age and stature 
as Tun Sinai and he took her back with him to Sourabaya, 
where he had her brought up with due care. And when in the 
course of time the girl reached marriageable age, he had her 
married. Thereupon he made ready ships to go to Malaka, 
and he chose out four (? forty) f 566 young men of good family 
(to accompany him): and when the ships were ready he set 
forth. 

On his arrival at Malaka, Pateh Adam went to the Sri Nara 
'diraja: and he said, "I am come to ask you to fulfil your promise 
to give me your daughter in marriage." And the Sri Nara 'diraja 
answered, "But I never made any such promise!" Then said 
Pateh Adam, "Is it not a fact that when your daughter was still 
toddling, you said, 'Pateh Adam, just listen to what my child 
says! She wants you for a husband' ?" And the Sri Nara 'diraja 
answered, "Yes, I did say that, but I was only jesting with you, 
sir!" Then said Pateh Adam, "Is it in accordance with custom 
to jest with gentlementf?" He then went back to his lodging and 
made his plans for the rapef 5G6a of Tun Sinda, who was by now 
full grown and had her own separate house. Pateh Adam 
proceeded to bribe the Sri Nara 'diraja's gate-keeper, saying, "Let 
me and my forty men have access to the house of Tun Sinda." 
And the gate-keeper consented, for his loyalty to his master 
was not proof against bribery. Which shews how true is the 
saying of 'Ali (may God ennoble his countenance) "La Ichaira 
'I-wafa'i 'ala man la asla Iahu" which being interpreted is 'Put 
not your trust in men that have no breeding.' 

One night accordingly Pateh Adam and his chosen forty 
men entered the gate and Pateh Adam made his way to Tun 

• Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



137 


translated by C. C. Brown 

[ 162 — 163 ] Menida’s house. A hubbub arose and word was brought to the 
Sri Nara 'diraja, who was highly enraged and summoned his 
retainers. Straightway they assembled, armed to the teeth, and 
surrounded the house of Tun Menida. There Pateh Adam was 
sitting by the side of Tun Menida, his thigh resting on hers; 
and undoing his waistcloth he fastened one end round Tun 
Menida’s waist and the other round his own. He then drew 
his creese. By this time the house was surrounded by any 
number of men, and there seemed to be row upon row of 
weapons. Pateh Adam’s men fought with them until all forty of 
them were slain; but when he wasf 567 informed punapa karsa 
andeka dening peria’i punika kabeh sanipun pejah (what do 
you propose to do now, for all your followers have been killed?) 
he merely replied dendamene kang sam pun pe/ah ingsun putera 
dalem ikabela nanging paratu (never mind if all of them are 
killed: this girl I have here is all I want). 

And men forced their way into the house and were for killing 
Pateh Adam: but he said, “If I die, this girl dies too!” When the 
Sri Nara 'diraja was told how Pateh Adam was behaving, he said, 
“Kill him not lest he kill my daughter, for the whole of Java 
would not compensate me for my daughter’s death!” So Pateh 
Adam was not killed but was married to Tun Menida, from 
whose side he never moved a finger’s breadth the whole time he 
was in Malaka: wherever she went, he was with her. And when 
the season came for the return voyage to Java, Pateh Adam sought 
leave of the Sri Nara 'diraja to depart and take Tun Menida with 
him. To this the Sri Nara ’diraja agreed, and Pateh Adam then 
presented himself before Sultan Mahmud Shah to seek leave 
from him to depart. The king bestowed upon him robes of honour 
completed with accessories. Pateh Adam thereupon set sail for 
Java and arrived at Sourabaya in due course. By Tun Menida 
he had a son named Tun Husain and it is he who is Chief of 
Sourabaya at the present time. 

Chapter XVII 

The Raja of Kedah visits Malacca to obtain recognition as 
Ruler of Kedah. His tacit tribute to the greatness of Bendahara 
Sri Maharaja. The incident of Tun Perpateh Hitam being sum¬ 
moned before the Bendahara by a foreigner and the subsequent 
execution of himself and his son for disrespect to the Bendahara. 

(Shellabear chapter XXXII ) 

Here now is a story of the Raja of Kedah, who in his tumf 568 
went to Malaka to do homage and ask for the drumf 568a of 
sovereignty. When he arrived at Malaka, Sultan Mahmud Shah 
accorded him a seat in the hall of audience on the same level 
as ministers of state, and bestowed rich presents upon him. 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



138 


The Malay Annals 


[ 163 — 164 ] One day Bendahara Sri Maharaja was seated in his own hall 

with people before him, and Temenggong Tun Hasan and the 
ministers of state were present. And food was served. Bendahara 
Sri Maharaja ate by himself and those present waited until he 
should have eaten, for it was the custom f 509 that the Bendahara 
of Malaka should not eat with others, and they could not eat 
until he had finished eating: that was the custom. But that 
day, while Bendahara Sri Maharaja was still eating, the Raja of 
Kedah appeared and was forthwith invited to come in and take 
his seat. He accordingly came in and seated himself beside 
Temenggong Tun Hasan. When the Bendahara had finished 
eating and was taking sireh, Temenggong Tun Hasan and the 
ministers of state drew towards them the food that the Benda¬ 
hara had left on the dishes. And Temenggong Tun Hasan 
invited the Raja of Kedah to partake of the food and the Raja 
of Kedah was about to do so when the Bendahara said to him,. 
"You, sire, must not eat of the' food that I have left!” But the 
Raja of Kedah replied, "No matter, for you are my senior, Benda¬ 
hara, I regard you as my father.” He then ate, with Temeng¬ 
gong Tun Hasan and the ministers of state, of the Bendahara's 
leavings. And when they had eaten, sireh was brought. And 
after the Raja of Kedah had been some while in Malaka, he 
sought leave of Sultan Mahmud Shah to depart for Kedah. And 
Sultan Mahmud Shah accorded to him the drum of sovereignty 
and at the same time presented him with a robes of honour as 
befitted his rank. The Raja of Kedah then returned to Kedah r 
where he had the drum of sovereignty beaten. 

Now there was a minister of Sultan Mahmud Shah, Tun Per- 
pateh Adam. He was a descendant of Tun Jana Buga Dendang 
and he had a son named Tun Husain, who was an extremely 
well-built man. And Tun Husain said, "If ever the conduct! 570 
of my father is called in question, I shall fight!” Now it 
happened by the will of God that Tun Perpateh Hitam had a 
dispute with a foreigner, and he was called upon to appear 
before the Bendahara with the foreigner. The Laksamana was 
present at the time, for it was the custom of the Bendaharas of 
Malaka that if the Bendahara was inquiring into disputes the 
Temenggong and the Laksamana should always be with him. If 
anyone shewed disrespect to the Bendahara, it was the Laksa¬ 
mana who put him to death; and in cases where it was proper 
to arrest anyone and put him in fetters, it was the Temenggong 
who made the arrest. Such was the custom in the days of 
Malaka. When Tun Perpateh Hitam had been summoned to 
appear before the Bendahara, Tun Husain came to join his 
father. And when Tun Perpateh Hitam beheld Tun Husain 
coming armed with his long creese, he thought to himself, "It 
looks as though Tun Husain's going to be as good as his word!”: 
and he rose to his feet and kicked up the mat, saying, "A fine 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



translated by C. C. Brown 139 

1164 ] sort of minister! 571 this is, to call my conduct in question like 
this!” Thereupon the Laksamana drew his sword, saying, "How 
dare you show disrespect, kicking up the mat in the presence 
of the Bendahara?” And he slashed at Tun Perpateh Hitam 
with his sword while at the same time others drew their weapons 
and stabbed at him. In vain did the Bendahara try to restrain 
them, they heeded him not and Tun Perpateh Hitam was killed. 
When Tun Husain saw this, he drew his creese to fight. But 
the Laksamana said, "You're going to be disloyal, are you, Tun 
Husain, that we may treat yourf 572 as weve treated your father?" 
And Tun Husain was struck down there and then. The Laksa¬ 
mana went forthwith to Sultan Mahmud Shah and related Jo 
him all that had happened. And the king said, "If you had not 
killed them then, Laksamana, assuredly we would have killed 
them ‘later, for we consider disrespect in the presence of the 
Bendahara to be as though it were done in our own presence, 
no less.” And Sultan Mahmud Shah/ rewarded the Laksamana 
with robes of honour. 

God knoweth the truth. 

Chapter XVIII 

The plight of the Indragiri people in Malacca. They ask 
their Raja to take them back to Indragiri. He himself escapes 
and returns to Indragiri, where his cousin Maharaja Isak is 
driven from the throne and flees to Lingga, where subsequently 
he becomes ruler. Sultan Mahmud sends Hang Nadim to India 
to buy special cloth fabrics for him. Hang Nadim draws 
patterns better than any of the Kalinga designers and returns 
with the desired fabrics, but his ship is wrecked as the result of 
a curse laid on the shipmaster by a Saiyid whom the shipmaster 
had insulted. Hang Nadim escapes with four cloths to Ceylon 
where he makes lanterns out of egg-shells for the Raja and 
eventually reaches Malacca, where he incurs the wrath of Sultan 
Mahmud. The death of Laksamana Hang Tuah. 

(Shellbear, chapter XXVIII) 

Here now is a story of Maharaja Merlang, who was Raja of 
Indragiri, thought it was at Malaka that he died. He had a son 
named Raja Nara Singa, born of his consort, the daughter of him 
f 574 who found God's Mercy at Malaka: and it was Raja Nara 
Singa who then became the leader of the Indragiri men in Malaka 
f 575 . Now at that time the young nobles of Malaka were in the 
habit of summoning the young nobles of Indragiri and ordering 
them to carry them pick a-back hither and thither: no sooner had 
one been so carried than another would ask to be. This was more 
than the men of Indragiri could stand, and they presented them¬ 
selves before Raja Nara Singa, saying, "May it please your 
Highness, let us seek leave to return to Indragiri, for we 
have no desire to stay here in Malaka. Tli£ people here do not 
treat usf 575a properly, they turn us into their slaves!” Raja 

J952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



140 


The Malay Annals 


165 ] Nara Singa agreed and presented himself before Sultan Mahmud 
Shah when he was giving an audience. After doing obeisance 
to Sultan Mahmud Shah he said, "Your Highness, by your 
gracious favour I would ask to be allowed to return to Indragiri, 
for although your Highness has of your bounty bestowedj 57a 
Indragiri upon me, I have never yet seen the country/' But 
Sultan Mahmud Shah would not let him go. Raja Nara Singa 
said nothing when he heard Sultan Mahmud Shah's decision. 

But in the course of time he succeeded in escaping from 
Malaka and returned to Indragiri, where he found that Maharaja 
Tuban younger brother of Maharaja Merlang had died also,, 
leaving a son called Maharaja Isak, and it was he who governed 
Indragiri. But when Maharaja Nara Singa arrived, Maharaja 
Isak was driven out by Tun Kechil and Tun Balia, chiefs of 
Indragiri, and fled f 577 to Lingga, where he married a daughter 
of the Raja of Lingga. When the (Maha) Raja of Lingga died, 
Maharaja Isak became Raija of Lingga. He had many children. 
And Raja Nara Singa became Raja of Indragiri. 

Now Sultan Mahmud Shah was desirous of sending an envoy 
to Kalinga to buy cloth for him. He wanted forty varieties of 
cloth and four lengths of each variety, and each length had to 
have forty varieties of floral motif. As his envoy to Kalinga he 
appointed Hang Nadim. A Malaka man by descent, Hang 
Nadim was the son-in-law of the Laksamana and was distantly 
relatedf 578 to Bendahara Sri Maharaja. He embarked in the ship 
of Hang Isak and set sail for Kalinga. When in due course 
he reached Kalinga, he presented himself before the Raja of 
Kalinga, to whom he submitted the wishes of Sultan Mahmud 
Shah. The Raja of Kalinga thereupon ordered that all who 
could design should bef 579 assembled, and there came together 
all the designers of Kalinga, to the number of about five hundred. 
The Raja of Kalinga then ordered them to make designs as Hang 
Nadim wished, and the Kalinga designers set to work in front of 
Hang Nadim. And when they had finished their work, they 
shewed their designs to Hang Nadim, but he did not like them. 
So they drew different designs, but he did not like those either. 
And though the Kalinga craftsmen submitted design after design. 
Hang Nadim still was not satisfied. Then the designers said, 
"This is all that we can do. We can produce no other designs. 
But if Hang Nadim will give us specimens of what he wants, we 
will follow his designs." Hang Nadim asked for paper and ink 
and when these were supplied by the Kalinga men, he drew the 
floral motifs he wanted. When the Kalinga designers saw his 
work they were astounded and their hands shook as they beheld 
his draughtmanship. When Hang Nadim had completed his 
drawings, he shewed them to the designers, saying, "These are 
the motifs If 579a want." But out of the hundreds of Kalinga 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



translated by C. C. Brown 141 

[ 166 — 167 ] designers there were only two who could copy Hang Nadim’s 
designs, and they copied whatever he drew. The other designers 
then said, "Here in front of Hang Nadim we cannot draw: we 
must returnf 580 to our homes and then we can draw/' When 
Hang Nadim agreed, they went home to do their drawing; and 
when they had completed!f 58;l their designs, they delivered 
to Hang Nadim cloth such as was desired by Sultan Mahmud 
Shah. When presently the season for the return voyage to 
Malaka came round, Hang Nadim departed, travelling in Hang 
Isak’s ship, in which he stowed the cloth he had bought. 

Now Hang Isak had had as passenger in his ship a certain 
Saiyid: and according to the Saiyid’s reckoning of his account 
with Hang Isak, there was some money due to him from Hang 
Isak. And he said to Hang Isak, "There is still some money or 
mine with you, Hang Isak. Please let me have it back/' To 
which Hang Isak replied, "What money of yours have I still? 
What sort of a holy man are you to make false charge against 
people like this? Are you a holy manf 582 of the testicles, by 
any chance? (Like these !).” And the holy man said, "Now 
then, Hang Isak, I am one of God’s servants and you expose 
yourself thus to me ! Woe be to you on this voyage!” Where¬ 
upon Hang Nadim said to the Saiyid "I ask your pardon, sir. Let 
not me, I pray be involvedf 583 in this affair”. And the Saiyid patted 
Hang Nadim on the back, saying, "To youf 584 and yours, Nadim, 
no harm shall come.” The Sharif then went home, and Hang Isak 
set sail. And when they were well out to sea, suddenly the ship 
foundered and Hang Isak and all his crew were drowned, though 
there was neither rain nor storm. But Hang Nadim and several 
of those with him escaped in a boat together with (? some of) f 585 
the cloth and came safely to Selan. When the Raja of Selan 
heard of his arrival, he sent for Hang Nadim and ordered him 
to make him an eggshell lantern. And Hang Nadim fashioned the 
eggshell with rare delicacy and lit a candle in it, so that the effect 
was very striking. And when the lantern was finished, he present¬ 
ed it to the Raja of Selan, who bounteously rewarded him and 
would fain have kept him in Selan but Hang Nadim contrived 
to escape on board a ship bound for Malaka. When he reached 
Malaka, he presented himself straightway before Sultan Mahmud 
Shah, taking with him the four pieces of cloth he had 
savedf 586 (?). These he presented to Sultan Mahmud Shah, 
at the same time relating all that had happened. And Sultan 
Mahmud Shah said, "Once you had known that Hang Isak had 
had a curse laid upon him by the Sharif, why did you still travel 
in his ship?” And Hang Nadim answered, "I went in_Hang 
Isak’s ship because there was no other ship sailing. Had I waited 
for another ship, I should have been late in returning to Malaka ! r 
And Sultan Mahmud Shah was grievously displeased with Hang 
Nadim. 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society . 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



142 


The Malay Annals 


C«7J 


Now Laksamana Hang Tuah had died and his son-in-law 
Khoja Husain, was made Laksamana in his place by Sultan 
Mahmud Shah. Laksamana Hang Tuah had two wives. One 
of them, who was related to the Sri Bija 'diraja (or Datok 
Bongkokf 587 as he was called) had three children; the eldest, a 
daughter, was married to Khoja Husain; the second was a son 
named Tun f 588 Bayajit, and the youngest, a daughter called Tun 
'Sirah, became one of Sultan Mahmud Shah's consorts and was 
the mother of Raja Dewi. The other wife of the Laksamana 
was of the family of Bendahara Paduka Raja .and was related to 
the Paduka Tuan. She had two children; one, a son who was 
given the title of (Sang) f 589 Guna, and the other a daughter 
who was married to Hang Nadim. It was Khoja Husain who 
succeeded his father-in-law as Laksamana. Laksamana Khoja 
Husain had a son named Tun 'Abdullah. 

God knoweth the truth. 

Chapter XIX 

The Sriwa Raja is sent to Pahang to install Sultan ‘Abdu’l- 
Jamal as ruler in succession to his father, Sultan Muhammad 
Shah. His adventures in Pahang. He sees Tun Teja, the 
Bendahara of Pahang’s daughter, and brings back to Malacca 
so glowing an account of her that Sultan Mahmud is determined 
to marry her despite the fact that she is already betrothed to 
the new Sultan of Pahang. He offers to reward with even ‘half 
his kingdom 1 whoever will abduct her. This is a chance for 
Hang Nadim to redeem his failure in Kalinga (chapter XVIII) 
and he proceeds to Pahang, bribes all and sundry and success¬ 
fully abducts Tun Teja. Sultan ‘Abdu’l-Jamal is so angry that 
he meditates an attack on Malacca in which he will demolish 
the audience hall with his elephant Beman Chengkobat! Sultan 
Mahmud thereupon offers immunity for all time to whoever will 
capture Beman Chengkobat for him and Laksamana Khoja 
Husain volunteers for the task which, by methods similar to those 
employed by Hang Nadim in the abduction of Tun Teja, he 
successfully accomplishes. 

( Shelkbear , chapter XXIX) 

Here now is a story of Pahang, where Sultan Mahmudf 590 , 
the old Raja, had died and had been succeeded on the throne 
by his son, Sultan 'Abdu’l-Jamal. The Bendahara of Pahang 
at that time, Sri Amar Bangsa as was his title, had a daughter 
called Tun Teja Ratna Benggala, whose beauty was such that f 590a 
throughout Pahang at that time she had no peer and in everything 
that she did there was a charm that none could rival. Hence 
came the verse 

Tun Tejaf 591 Ratna Benggala, 

How well she split the peppercorn! 

If you don't believe my word, 

PH swear it on the Kora'an! 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



145* 


translated by C. C. Brown 

[ 167 — 168 ] Now Sultan 'Abdu'l-Jamal desired Tun Teja for his consort, and' 
the Bendahara of Pahang was agreeable and was merely waiting; 
until the next seasonf 591a to celebrate the wedding. 

And Sultan 'Abdu'l-Jamal commanded the Sri Wangsa 'diraja 
to go to Malaka and take (to Sultan Mahmud Shah) the grave- 
cloth of his father and report his father's death. The letter he 
was to take was borne in procession to the ship and the Sri Wangsa 
'diraja set forth for Malaka, where he arrived in due course. And 
Sultan Mahmud Shah came out to the hall and gave an audience, 
and he ordered the letter from Pahang to be brought from the 
ship with due ceremony. It was borne to the hall and was then 
read, and it ran as follows:—“My humble obeisance to your 
Highness: this is to inform you that your unclef 592 has returned 
to the Mercy of God." When Sultan Mahmud Shah thus heard 
of the death of Sultan Mahmud Shah, Raja of Pahang, for seven 
days the royal bandf 592a was not allowed to play. He then com¬ 
manded the Sriwa Raja to go to Pahang and install Sultan 'Abdu'l- 
Jamal as Raja. The letter to Pahang was borne in procession, 
the Sri Wangsa 'diraja was given f 593 robes of honour by the king 
and the Sriwa Raja then set forth for Pahang accompanied by the 
Sri Wangsa 'diraja. And when they reached Pahang, Sultan 
'Abdu'l-Jamal was well pleased and forthwith ordered the letter 
to be brought ceremonially from the ship in accordance with 
ancient custom. On arrival at the hall of audience it was read, 
and it ran as follows:—“Greetings and good wishes from the 
younger brother to the elder brother. What has come to pass is 
in accordance with God's decree and how should we change it? 
Therefore the younger brother has bidden his servant, the Sriwa 
Raja, go to Pahang to install the elder brother as Raja." And 
Sultan 'Abdu'l-Jamal was well pleased with the wording of the 
letter (from his cousin )f 594 . 

He then inaugurated the installation festivities that lasted 
for seven days and seven nights, and he was duly installed by the 
Sriwa Raja by the beat of the drumf 594a of sovereignty. The Sriwa 
Raja then sought leave to depart; but Sultan 'Abdu'l-Jamal 
said, “Tarry awhile and let us noose elephants, for at this season 
elephants will be coming down from the hills and noosing 
elephants is rare sport!" But the Sriwa Raja replied, “If it please 
your Highness, I would ask to be allowed to depart notwith¬ 
standing, for if I do not put to sea now, the contrary wind will 
assuredly set in and I shall be delayed here, which will bring 
upon me the displeasure of your Highness' younger brother. 
Nevertheless I should greatly like to see some elephant-noosing. 
Would it perchance be possible to release these tame elephants 
here in the city and then have them noosed?" And Sultan 
'Abdu'l-Jamal answered that that could be done, and he sent for 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



144 The Malay Annals 

[ 168 — 169 ] the most experienced elephant-men in Pahang. When they came 
and were told what the oriwa Raja wanted, they said, "If we can 
noose wild elephants, we can certainlyf 595 noose tame ones!” And 
the Sriwa Raja said, "Just noose one for me, I want to see how 
it's done!” Sultan 'Abdu'l-Jamal then ordered that a tame 
elephant should be let loose. Other elephants were made to 
surround it and scores of skilled elephant-men held their nooses 
as though they were noosing wild elephants and pitched them at 
the feet of the tame elephant: but instead of catching the elephant 
that had been let loose they caught other elephants and even 
caught each other by the neck and feet! And the elephant men 
were astounded and said to Sultan 'Abdu'l-Jamal, "The fact is, 
your Highness, we cannot noose that elephant in the presence 
of the Sriwa Raja, for he knowsf 596 too much about elephants!” 
And Sultant 'Abdu'l-Jamal was covered with confusion when he 
saw what had happened, and he withdrew into the palace: where¬ 
upon all those present departed, each one to his house. 

On the following day Sultan 'Abdu’l-Jamal had his elephant 
Merkepal well smeared with oil, and he would not allow the pack- 
saddle to be put on. Merkepal had hind-quarters that sloped very 
steeply, so much so that only two keepers could sit on him at a 
time, a third was sure to fall off. Even two could only sit on his 
back if the pack-saddle were on. Sultan 'Abdu'l-Jamal then mount¬ 
ed Merkepal and made his way to the house of the Sriwa Raja, who 
when he learnt of the Sultan's coming forthwith. . the house and 
stood outside. Sultan 'Abdu'l-Jamal then asked him, "Where is 
your son, sirf 59Ga . I should likef 597 to take him with me on the 
elephant.” And the Sriwa Raja answered, "He is here, your High¬ 
ness”; but he thought to himself "He wants to kill my son, with 
an elephant whose back falls away as steeply as this, unsaddled 
and oiled into the bargain!” So he shouted to his son, "Omar, 
come here! The Raja wants to take you with him on his elephant.” 
When Tun 'Omar came, the Sriwa Raja whisperedj 598 something 
in his ear. Then he said out loud, "Go with the Sultan on his 
elephant!” Sultan 'Abdu'l-Jamal thereupon made the elephant 
kneel and Tun 'Omar quickly mounted the croup. The elephant 
then rose to his feet and set off towards Ayer Hitam. And Sultan 
'Abdu'l-Jamal took him up and down slopes that were steep and 
precipitousf 599 in order that, as he hoped, Tun 'Omar would fall 
off. But Tun 'Omar, when he felt that he was going to slide 
off, climbed backf 600 on to the elephant's middle, laying a charm 
on the beast. In vain then did the Raja of Pahang urge the 
elephant forward, he would'not move! So strongly did the king 
urge him forward that his forefeet pawed the air in the effort to 
advance while his hindlegs stood stock still! As soon as Tun 
'Omar felt sure of his seat he would let the elephant go and it 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



145 


translated by C. C. Brown 

[*69—*70] would then move forward. This happened two or three times. 

And Sultan 'AbduTJamal was astounded, and finally turned 
round and went back to his palace. 

The Sriwa Raja then sought leave to return to Malaka, and 
Sultan 'Abdu'l-Jamal had a letter written in reply to that which 
he had received from Malaka, and he gave the Sriwa Raja robes 
of honour. The letter was borne in procession to the Sriwa Raja's 
ship, and he then sailed for Malaka. On his arrival there the letter 
was borne in procession to the palace, and Sultan Mahmud Shah 
was well pleased to hear how the letter was worded and also to 
hear of all that the Sriwa Raja had done in Pahang. He compli¬ 
mented him and gave him robes of honour as befitted his rank. 
And the Sriwa Raja told Sultan Mahmud Shah of Tun Teja, 
the Bendahara of Pahang's daughter, whose beauty was such that 
none could rival her at that time: but he added that she was 
betrothed to the Raja of Pahang and that the wedding would 
soon take place. And when Sultan Mahmud Shah heard the 
Sriwa Raja s description, he conceived a great desire for the 
Bendahara of Pahang's daughter, and he said, “Whosoever brings 
hither to me the daughter of the Bendahara of Pahang, to him 
will I give anything that he desires, even to the half of my city and 
my regalia!" When he said that, it happened that Hang Nadim 
was below and heard it, and he thought to himself, “I must go to 
Pahang and see if I can get Tun Teja and bringf 601 her to the 
Ruler." Thus resolved he took passage in a ship bound for 
Pahang. When he reached Pahang he made great friends with 
a Cham there, called Saidi Ahmad. And Hang Nadim said to 
Nakhoda Saidi Ahmad, “Is it true that Tun Teja, the Bendahara 
of Pahang's daughter, is a great beauty? I should dearly like to 
set eyes on her. And Nakhoda Saidi Ahmad answered, “Yes, 
it is true: but she is betrothed to the Ruler of Pahang. What 
chance is there of your seeing her? She's the daughter of a 
chief. Why, even the sun and moon can't get a sight of her, 
let alone people like you and me!" But Hang Nadim thought 
over the matter, and he said, “How can we (?I)f 602 contrive to 
get her?" , 

It happened at that moment that an old woman who gave 
massage passed by, and Hang Nadim calledf 603 her to come in 
and had himself massaged by her. And he asked her of whose 
household she was and she answered that she was one of the 
Bendahara's slaves. Hang Nadim then asked her “Do you go into 
the house of the Bendahara?" And she replied that she did so 
constantly asf 604 the Bendahara's daughter Tun Teja employed 
her to give her massage. Then said Hang Nadim, “Is it true, 
as I hear, that Tun Teja is a great beauty?" To which the old 
woman replied, “The fact is there's no one in Pahang to compare 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society . 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



146 


The Malay Annals 


[ 170 — 171 ] with her. She has been betrothed to the Raja of Pahang and is 
to be married this coming season .” And Hang Nadim said to 
the masseuse, "Can I trust you with a secret?” And she answered, 
"Yes, God willing, for many is the time I have been given 
messages to take.” Then Hang Nadim gave her much gold and 
fine clothing: and when she cast her eyes on this profusion of 
precious things, she was conquered by the love of the goods of this 
world and pledged herself to keep Hang Nadim’s secret. Then 
said Hang Nadim, "If it can be contrived, you mustf 605 find 
some way of bringing Tun Teja to me so that I can offer her to 
the Raja of Malaka.” And he gave her some civet (?) f 605a and bade 
her rub it on the skin of Tun Teja. This the masseuse said she 
would do, and she went forthwith into the Bendahara’s close, 
crying, "Who wants massage? I will do it!” And Tun Teja bade 
her attendants call the masseuse as she wished for massage. So 
the masseuse went into the house to massage Tun Teja. 

And when she saw that they were by themselves, she said 
to Tun Teja,” It seemsf 606 a pity to me that a girl of your beauty 
should be marrying this Raja of ours! If a great Raja became 
your husband, lady, how much better that would be!” But Tun 
Teja replied, "Why, who is a greater Raja than this Raja of Pahang 
of ours?” Whereupon the masseuse said, "It isf 606a the Raja of 
Malaka who is the great Raja, and he is a fine-looking man as 
well!” Tun Teja said nothing: and the masseuse rubbed the 
body of Tun Teja with the civet Hang Nadim had given her, 
at the same time saying coaxingly to her "At this very moment 
there is here a servant of the Raja of Malaka. He is called Hang 
Nadim and he is come here to take you at the bidding of his 
master, who cannot send to ask for your hand in the usual way, 
he fears that the Raja of Pahang would not consent. That is why 
he has bidden Hang Nadim take you away secretly. If you are 
willing, lady, he will take you to Malaka. You will then without 
a doubt become the consort of the Raja of Malaka, and as he has 
no consort at present, it is you, lady, who will become Queen. 
But iff you marry the Raja of Pahang, you will have to play second 
fiddle to the Queen of Pahang, whereas if you marry the Raja of 
Malaka, the Queen of Pahang will have to do obeisance to you!” 
And Tun Teja was won over by what the old woman said: as says 
the poet La ta’manunna ‘ajuzatan dakhalatul-khabail, hal ta’ 
manunna asada ma Tghanam, which being interpreted is Trust 
not an old woman that enters thy house: is a tiger to be trusted 
with a herd of goats? 7 

,When the old woman sawf 607 that Tun Teja was won over, 
she went and informed Hang Nadim. He was overjoyed and 
going to Nakhoda Saidi Ahmad he said, "Are we real friends, you 
and I?” And Nakhoda Saidi Ahmad answered, "Of course 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



147 


translated by C. C. Brown 

[* 71 — 172 ] we are! Why, I would risk my life to help you!” Hang Nadim 
then told him how he had made a pact with Tun Teja And he 
said "If you are really my friend, go abroad your ship and wait for 
me at the mouth of the Pahang river, where I will join you at break 
of day. We will then go to Malaka, where I promise you the 
Ruler will raise you to honour.” Nakhoda Saidi Ahmad agreed 
and forthwith called in his crew, bidding them hasten, forf 608 the 
ship was about to sail now that the season was at hand. (?) Now 
Nakhoda Saidi Ahmad! 609 was a man clean out of the ordinary, 
his strength was prodigious. He then boarded his ship and went 
down the Pahang river until he had crossed the bar and there 
he lay to. 

And when it was night, Hang Nadim called the masseuse and 
bade her bribe the Bendahara of Pahang's gate-keepers. And she 
went and bribed them (?) and they agreed! 610 to hel^ (?) Hang 
Nadim. Then when day was about to break, at the time when all 
men are sound asleep, the masseuse brought Tun Teja to the man 
who was guarding the gate, and he opened the gate. Hang 
Nadim was waiting outside and the masseuse delivered Tun Teja 
to him. Hang Nadim wrapped! 611 his hands in cloth, received 
Tun Teja and bore her to a hired boat which was waiting at the 
landing-stage. Hang Nadim took her aboard the boat and then 
paddled off down stream. Now there were two successive booms 
across the Pahang river at that time. Hang Nadim filled the 
sleeves of his jacket with sand and he strewed the sand on the 
water, so that it sounded like a net being cast: and he asked the 
boom-keeper to open the boom. And the boom-keeper, hearing 
what sounded like a man casting a net, opened the boom. The 
same thing happened when they came to the next boom. Having 
passed both booms Hang Nadim paddled with all speed until he 
reached Saidi Ahmad's ship and put Tun Teja aboard. And 
the wind freshening, Nakhoda Saidi Ahmad ordered anchor to be 
weighed and then sailed for Malaka. 

And when it was day, Tun Teja's attendants came to the 
Bendahara and said, "Your daughter! 612 has disappeared: she is 
nowhere to be seen and none of usf 612a know where she is gone!” 
The Bendahara was dumbfounded, and though a thorough search 
was made, Tun Teja was not to be found. And loud was the 
wailing in the Bendahara's house. When Sultan ‘Abdul-Jamal 
came to hear what had happened, he was astounded and filled 
with grief, and lie gave orders for diligent inquiry to be made 
every-where. 

Presently there came a man who was from the mouth of 
the Pahang river to say that at dawn that day he had met Hang 
Nadim with a very beautiful woman whom he took on board the 

J952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



148 


The Malay Annals 


[ 172 — 173 ] ship of Saidi Ahmad and sailed off with to Malaka. When the 


Raja of Pahang heard what the man said, he was very angry and 
ordered ships to be made ready. A fleet of forty sail was accord- 
' - 1 ■ - 1 Sultan ‘Abdu'l- 



And all' the 


Pahang war-chiefs hastened forth, each in his own ship: and when 
they reached Pulau Keban they came up with the ship of Saidi 
Ahmad. And the men of Pahang attacked the ship and there 
was a general melee in the course of which the Pahang war-chiefs 
tried to put a grappling iron on Saidi Ahmad's ship. But Hang 
Nadim shot with his arrows those who tried to do the grappling 
and killed them, and their ship withdrew from the fray. It was 
soon succeeded by another, which however suffered the same fate: 
and when two or three ships had fared likewise, not one of the 
Pahang war-chiefs would make another attempt to approach. 
When Sultan ‘Abdu'l-Jamal saw what was happening, he ordered 
his own ship to be brought in to the attack. When it approach¬ 
ed, Hang Nadim forthwith shot an arrowf 613 and split the top 
of the Raja of Pahang's umbrella. And Hang Nadim cried, “Now 
then, you Pahang men, mark well how I can shoot! If I was 
going to take on the lot of you, I'd shoot the eyeballs out of you, 
man by man!" And the Pahang men were filled with awe by 
Hang Nadim's prowess with the bow, for he was the best shot 
of his day; he could even split a tree with his arrow! 

And a strong wind sprang up and Saidi Ahmad put riqht 
out to sea, but the Pahang snips could not follow him, they 
were too small for the big sea that was running. The Pahang 
men accordingly went back, hugging the shore, while Saidi 
Ahmad sailed for Malaka. 

When in due course the ship arrived in Malaka, word was 
brought to Sultan Mahmud Shah that Hang Nadim was come 
from Pahang in Nakhoda Saidi Ahmad's ship, bringing with him 
Tun Teja, daughter of the Bendahara of Pahang: and Sultan 
Mahmud Shah was well pleased to hear this news. That night 
Hang Nadim went to present himself before Sultan Mahmud 
Shah and offer Tun Teja to him. And the king was so greatly 
amazedf 614 (by her beauty) that he exclaimed ‘May God be exalted 
above what they say!' And he highly commended Hang Nadim 
to whom he gave robes of honour complete with all accessories, 
together with a vast amount of gold and silver. He also had 
Hang Nadim wedded with a daughter of the Paduka^Tuan. 
Nakhoda Saidi Ahmad was given the title of Tun Stia ‘diraja: 
he was presented with a sword and it was ordered that he should 
stand on the step below the throne together with the heralds. 
And Sultan Mahmud Shah married Tun Teja and was deeply 
enamoured of her, and by her he had a daughter, Princess Arma 
(?) Dewi. 


Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



translated by C. C. Brown 149 

[ 173 — 174 ] According to one tradition Sultan Mahmud Shah asked Tun 

Teja how she had fared in the company of Hang Nadim: and 
she answered, “Not only did he keep a respectful distance from 
me, he never even fixed his eyes upon me; and when he helped 
me aboard the ship, he wrapped his hands in cloth/' This 
greatly pleased Sultan Mahmud Shah and he became in conse¬ 
quence even more bountiful to Hang Nadim. Now when the 
ship of Saidi Ahmad had sailed from Pahang, the Raja of Pahang 
returned in anger to his capital. And mounting his elephant, 
Beman Chengkobat he said to the Bendahara and the Pahang 
war-chiefs, “Make ready ships, gentlemen, for we are going to 
attack Malaka! And you shall see whether I do not charge the 
Raja of Malaka's hall with Beman Chengkobat!" So saying he 
drove the elephant at his own hall and brought it crashing to the 
ground. “Thus will I charge the Malaka hall with this elephant 
of mine!", said the king. And the war-chiefs bowed their heads 
in fear at this display of the wrath of Sultan 1 'Abdu'l-Jamal: and 
he then retired into the palace. When it wsa known 
in Malaka how the Raja of Pahang was disposed, Sultan Mahmud 
Shah said to his war-chiefs, “Which of you will get me this 
elephant of the Raja of Pahang with which he proposes to 
charge this hall? Undertake this task, one of you, and however 
great be that man's offence against me, never will I take his 
life!" Then said Laksamana Khoja Husain, “May it please your 
Highness to send me to Pahang and, God willing, I will get 
the Raja of Pahang's elephant and present it to your Highness." 
Sultan Mahmud Shah agreed and bade Bendahara Sri Maharaja 
compose a letter to send to Pahang. When the letter was ready 
it was borne in procession (to the ship) and the Laksamana set 
forth for Pahang. 

When in due course the Laksamana arrived in Pahang, word 
was brought to Sultan 'Abdul'l-Jamal, “the Laksamana has come, 
sent to your Highness by your Highness's younger brother.' 
Sultan 'Abdul'l-Jamal then came forth to the hall of audience 
and ordered that the letter be duly fetched from the ship and 
borne in procession! with appropriate ceremony. When it 
reached the hall of audience, it was read: and so pleasingly was 
it worded that the king was delighted. The Laksamana then 
did obeisance and took his seat, above the Sri Akar Raja of 
Pahang. And the Laksamana said to Sultan ‘Abdu'l-Jamal, 
“Your Highness, a report has reached your Highness's younger 
brother that your Highness is grievously offended with him. 
That is why I have been sent hither to present myself before 
your Highness and convey the message he sends to you. 'Why 
should we quarrel, brother with brother? Are not Malaka and 
Pahang but one country?' " And when Sultan 'Abdu'l-Jamal 
heard the words of the Laksamana, he replied, “Who brought 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



150 


The Malay Annals 


|[ 174 — 175 ] such a story to Malaka? What lies he was telling! What think 
you, Laksamana, is it reasonable that Pahang should fight 
Malaka?” Then ensued a brief conversation, after which Sultan 
'Abdu'l-Jamal withdrew into the palace and all those present in 
audience wentf 614a home. Now the Laksamana had moored his 
ship close to the place where the Raja of Pahang's elephant was 
bathed: and when the men in charge of the elephants brought 
their elephants down to bathe, the Laksamana sent for them and 
gave them food and gold, so that they were all well disposed 
towards Laksamana Khoja Husain, especially the man in charge 
of Beman Chengkobat whose favour the Laksamana took parti¬ 
cular painsf 615 to win. And the Laksamana cleared half his ship 
as a stable for the elephant and put it in order, for he had come 
to Pahang with but four ships. After he had been there some 
days, the Laksamana sought leave from the Raja of Pahang to 
depart for Malaka. Sultan ‘Abdu'l-Jamal then had a letter 
prepared in reply to that which he had received from Malaka, 
and he gave the Laksamana robes of honour. The letter was 
borne in procession to the Laksamana's ship; and when it had 
reached the ship, those who escorted it returned. The Laksa¬ 
mana tarried awhile, waiting until the elephants should be 
brought down to the river to bathe. When the time for the 
bathing of the elephants arrived, all the elephants including 
Beman were brought down to bathe by their keepers. The 
Laksamana then sent for Beman and put him aboard his ship, for 
the man in charge of Beman had a great liking for the Laksamana 
and would do anything he wanted. Once the elephant was 
embarked the Laksamana moved off downstream. And there was 
great excitement among the people of Pahang, the tale going 
round that the Laksamana was carrying off the elephant Beman 
by force. 

When Sultan ‘Abdu'l-Jamal heard the story, he was furious 
and cried, “The Raja of Malaka has treated usf 616 as people 
treat a monkey, putting banana into its mouth with one 
hand and sticking thorns into its rump with the other!” And 
he bade his war-chiefs make ready ships to pursue the Laksa¬ 
mana, and (? they set out with) a fleet of thirty sail under the 
command of Tun Aria. When they reached Sedili they came up 
with the Laksamana, and Tun Aria attacked, supported by the 
Pahang war-chiefs. But the Laksamana shot down with his 
arrows any who came within range and the men of Pahang were 
afraid to approach the Laksamana's ship. When Tun Aria saw 
this, he himself dashed in, but the Laksamana shot an arrow, 
hitf 617 the top of the mast of Tun Aria's ship and split it in 
two. He then sped another arrow and this time shot away the 
top of Tun Aria's umbrella. Tun Aria was standing opposite the 
f 618 mainmast, holding his buckler and taking no notice of the 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



translated by C. C. Brown 15T 

[ 175 — 176 ] Laksamana’s arrows though they split everything like thunderbolts, 
so that those who carriedf 019 bucklers had their bucklers shot 
away, those who carried long shields were transfixed through their 
long shields: and men were killed beyond number. Tun Aria 
however continuedf 619a to attack the Laksamana’s ship until the 
Laksamana shot an arrow which pierced his shield and wounded 
him in the breast. When it was seen that Tun Aria had been 
wounded, the Pahang fleet turned and fled in complete disorder. 
The Laksamana then proceeded on his way hugging the coast and 
finally sailed for Malaka, which he reached in due course. When 
Sultan Mahmud Shah heard that the Laksamana had arrived 
and that he had brought the Raja of Pahang s elephant, he sent 
a party to welcome him. And when the Laksamana presently 
appeared before Sultan Mahmud Shah, the king bestowed upon 
him such presents as are given to princes. The elephant was 
landed from the ship and brought to the palace: and Sultan 
Mahmud was overjoyed to see the elephant and handed him 
over to the Sri Rama, for he was Master of the King's Elephants. 

Meanwhile the Pahang force which had pursued the Laksa¬ 
mana returned to Pahang, and the war-chiefs presented them¬ 
selves before Sultan ‘Abdu’l-Jamal to whom they related all that 
had happened. Ilis fury was as that of a snakef 619b as it rises above 
its coils. Sultan 'Abdu’l-Jamal then made his son Sultan Mansur 
Raja of Pahang in his place and abdicating from the throne, he 
took up his abode at Lubok Peletang, moving upstream until he 
could no longer hear the royal drum, and when he had reached 
that point, there he abode. He then gave himself up wholly 
to religion, wherefore after his death he was known as He who 
found the Mercy of God in Piety. When Sultan Mansur came 
to the throne, Raja Ahmad, the late Raja's father (? uncle), 
(? acted as regent) with Raja Muzaffar as chief minister. 

God knoweth the truth. 

Chapter XX 

Chau Sri Bangsa, a Siamese prince, conquers Kota Mahligai 
(Petani), having vowed that he would turn Muhammadan if 
victorious. He fulfils his vow. The origin of the name Petani. 
Chau Sri Bangsa obtains recognition from Malacca and is installed 
as Sultan Ahmad Shah of Petani. The coming of Maulana 
Sadar Jahan to Malacca. Sultan Mahmud becomes his pupil. 
The Maulana’s rather Pecksniffian rebuke of the Sri Rama in 
his cups provokes a surprisingly good retort from the Sri Rama, 
and the Maulana has no success either in a verbal contest with 
Tun Mai Ulat Bulu. The mission to Pasai to pose a problem of 
theology. The message of Pasai is not put in writing but learnt 
by heart by the envoy for a special reason. Pasai gives an 
apparently satisfactory answer to the problem, though (as in 
the case in Chapter X) we are not told what it was. 

(Shellaber, chapter XXXII) 


1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



152 


The Malay Annals 

1*76—177] Here now is a story of a certain country called Kota Mahligai, 
of which Raja Sulaiman Shah was Raja. When news reached 
Siam that Kota Mahligai was a fine country, a Siamese prince, 
called Chau Sri Bangsa, organized an expedition and attacked 
Kota Mahligai. Raja Sulaiman set out to expel the invader and a 
battle ensued between the two princes. And Chau Sri Bangsa 
said, "If I defeat Raja Sulaiman I will embrace Islam/' And 
by the will of God Kota Mahligai fell, Raja Sulaiman was killed 
by Chau Sri Bangsa and Chau Sri Bangsa became the ruler of 
the people of Kota Mahligai. And he embraced Islam. He 
then gave orders to seek for land that would be a good site for a 
city. 

And people reported to Chau Sri Bangsa that there was a 
fishermanf 020 named Pa' Tani dewelling on the coast and that 
where he dwelt there was a good site, as far as they could judge. 
Chau Sri Bangsa accordingly proceeded to where Pa' Tani lived 
and saw for himself that the site was in fact as good as it had 
been made out to be. So he built a city there to which he gave 
the name of Patani after the fisherman, and it is by that name 
that the place is known (to this day)t 021 . And Chau Sri 
Bangsa sent (? Kum Pal) to Malaka to do homage and crave 
from Sultan Mahmud Shah the drum of sovereignty. Akun 
Pal accordingly set out and in the course of some days reached 
Malaka. When Sultan Mahmud Shah was informed that an 
envoy was come from Patani, he gave orders for the letter from 
Patani to be fetched with ceremony from the ship and brought 
in procession with such honours as were accorded to letters from 
Pahang. On arrival at the hall of audience'the letter was read 
and it was worded as follows:— "The son sends his obeisance 
to his father" and after various compliments it went on, "the 
son has ordered Akun Pal to do homage to the father and the 
son craves from his royal father the drum of sovereignty." 
Sultan Mahmud Shah was well pleased, and Akun Pal was 
given robes of honour befitting his rank and accorded a seat in 
the hall of audience on the same level as the heralds. Sultan 
Mahmud Shah then ordered Kadli Menawar Shah to compose 
an instrument for Chau Sri Bangsa conferring upon him the 
the title of Sultan Ahmad Shah. He then granted a drum of 
sovereignty and this, with complimentary presents to accompany 
the letter to Patani, was delivered to Akun Pal who was given 
robes of honour. The letter and the instrument were borne in 

P rocession to the ship of Akun Pal, who thereupon departed for 
atani. On his arrival at Patani he gave ordersf 621 * for the ruler- 
ship of Chau Sri Bangsa to be duly established and Chau Sri 
Bangsa was then installed as ruler by beat of the drum of so¬ 
vereignty, with the title of Sri Sultan Ahmad Shah. The king 
begat a son named Chau Kam (?) and Chau Kam (?) begat a 
son who became Raja in Siam (?). 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



translated by C. C. Brown 153 

[ 177 — 178 ] Now there came to Malaka a ship from the regions above 
the wind, and in this ship there was a pundit named Maulana 
Sadar Jahan. He was a great scholar and Sultan Mahmud Shah 
became his pupil and ordered his son, Raja Ahmad, to go to 
him for instruction. Maulana Sadar Jahan was known as “the 
Makhdum" and all the Malaka chiefs went to him for instruc¬ 
tion. And it happened one night that while Bendahara Sri 
Maharaja was conversing with Makhdum Sadar Jahan on points 
of doctrine, the Sri Rama appeared, very much the worse for 
liquor, for he was a great drinker. [When the Sri Rama pre¬ 
sented himself before Sultan Mahmud Shah, the king would 
order his servants to ‘bring the Sri Rama'sf 622 food’, and they 
would bring it on silver trays and present it to the Sri Rama, 
wearing the shoulder-cloth]. When the Sri Rama reached the 
Bendahara's house and perceived that the Bendahara was con¬ 
versing with the Makhdum, he said, “Let me join the class!" 
And Bendahara Sri Maharaja bade him be seated. But when 
Makhdum Sadar Jahan perceived that the Sri Rama was drunk 
and whiffed the smell of alcohol in the Sri Rama's breath, he 
said “Al-khamru ummu’l-kaba’ith” which means “alcohol is 
the mother of evils." To which the Sri Rama retorted 
“Al-hamku ummu ‘ 1-khaba’ith ", which means ‘Worldliness is the 
mother of evils'. Why was it, sir, that you came here from 
above the wind? Was it not to acquire riches? That was the 
result of worldliness!" At that the Makhdum was deeply offended 
and arose to go, and despite all the efforts of Bendahara Sri 
Maharaja to induce him to stay he refused to do so and went 
home. And Bendahara Sri Maharaja said to the Sri Rama, 
“What means this drunkenness? It is a good thing the Ruler 
did not hear what you said to the Makhdum! If he comes to 
know of it, you will be in bad odour!", And the Sri Rama 
replied, “I am in the Ruler's hands. What is to be done? 
What's said is said and can't be recalled." Food was then 

brought and set before the Sri Rama, and he and all the others 
present partook of it. After they had eaten they satf 623 for a 
while and the Sri Rama then took his leave of Bendahara Sri 
Maharaja and returned to his house. 

On the following day the Bendahara went by himself to the 
Makhdum's house, and Makhdum Sadar Jahan was delighted 
to see him. He was at the moment teaching Tun Mai Ulat Bulu 
[Tun Mai Ulat Bulu's real name was Tun Muhyi'ud-din and he 
was the son of Tun Zainu'l-‘Abidin and grandson of Bendahara 
Paduka Raja, but because he was hairy he was known as Tun Mai 
Ulat Bulu] In the course of the lesson it was found that Tun Mai 
Ulat Bulu was quite incapablef 623a of pronouncing what he was 
taught because the tongue of Malays always has been ‘hard'. And 
Makhdum Sadar Jahan was cross with him and said, “What is one 
to do with a tongue like Tun Mai Ulat Bulu's, so ‘hard' that when 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society . 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



154 


The Malay Annals 

I 1 78—179] we say one thing he says another?" And Tun Mai Ulat Bulu an¬ 
swered "I find it difficult to pronounce your language because it is 
not my own language. If you tried to pronounce my language, you 
would be in the same plight!" And Makhdum Sadar Jahan said, 
"Why, what is there difficult in this Malay language of yours that 
I cannot pronounce it?" Then said Tun Mai Ulat Bulu, "Please 
say kunyit, sir." The Makhdum pronounced the word as kun-nyit. 
"No, sir, that was wrong," said Tun Mai Ulat Bulu, "now try 
nyiru ." But the Makhdum pronounced the word as niru. Then 
Tun Mai Ulat Bulu said kuching , which the Makhdum pro¬ 
nounced as kusing. And Tun Mai Ulat Bulu said, "How can 
you claim to be able to pronounce our language, sir, any more 
than I can yours?" And Makhdum Sadar Jahan was furious and 
said, "Never again will I attempt to teach this Tun Mai Ulat 
Bulu!" 

It happened once that Sultan Mahmud Shah wished to send 
.an envoy to Pasai to ask for the answer to a question in dispute 
between the divines of the Country ! 624 beyond the River, the 
divines of Khurassan and the divines of Irak. And the king con¬ 
sulted with the Bendahara and the chiefs. "How are we going 
to send our message to Pasai?" he asked. "If we send it in 
writing, we shall certainly come off badly, for the men of Pasai 
have no scruples about altering the text of a letter. Even if the 
letter says 'greetings', they still make it say 'obeisance'! 625 ." Then 
said Bendahara Sri Maharaja, "In that case all we have to do is 
this; we send an envoy but without a letter and we order the 
envoy to commit the message to memory." And Sultan Mahmud 
Shah replied, "Yes, that will do, but Tun Muhammad must be 
the envoy." Tun Muhammad having signified his compliance, 
the letter was borne in procession to the ship; and as presents to 
accompany the letter the king sent a cleaver of Pahang make 
with gold inlay, a white cockatoo and a purple cockatoo. Tun 
Muhammad then set forth and on the voyage he committed the 
contents of the letter to memory. 

When Tun Muhammad reached Pasai, the Raja of Pasai was 
informed that an envoy was come from Malaka. The Raja of 
Pasai gave orders to his chiefs to fetch the letter with ceremony 
from the ship and bring it ! 626 with drum, pipe, clarionet and 
kettledrums. And when they came to Tun Muhammad, the chiefs 
sent to welcome the letter said to him, "Where is the letter? 
Let us take it in procession." But Tun Muhammad answered, 
"I am the letter! Take me in procession!" He was accordingly 
mounted on an elephant and taken in procession to the hall of 
audience. When the procession arrived at the hall, Tun 
Muhammad dismounted from the elephant and standing at the 
place where letters were read he proceeded to recite the letter, 
as follows:— 


Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



translated by C. C. Brown 


155 


[ 179 — 180 ] “Greetings and prayers to God from the elder brother to his 
younger brother Sri Sultanf 627 the Exalted, the Honoured 
King, Shadow of God in the World. The elder brother's reason 
for sending his chiefs, Tun Muhammad and Tun Bija 
Wangsa, to present themselves before his younger brother is that 
the elder brother wishes to know the explanation of this difficulty— 
first man kala, Inna’llah a taala khalikun warazkun fiTazali iakad 
kaiaxa , that is to say whoever declares God to be the creator and 
preserver to eternity is verily an infidel'; and second man kala . 
Inna’llaha taala lam yakun khalikan warazikan fil-azali iakad 
kaiara. that is to say 'whoever declares that God is not thq 
creator and preserver to eternity is verily an infidel.' It is 
desired that the younger brother should give the explanation." 
The Raja of Pasai assembled all the divines of Pasai and bade 
them give the required explanation but not one of them could do 
so. The Raja of Pasai then bade Tun Muhammad approach 
and when he was close to him the Raja of Pasai told him the 
(? explanation of the) difficulty, saying “Thisf 628 is the explana¬ 
tion that our brother in Malaka desires." This answer satisfied 
Tun Muhammad and he said, "It is as your Highness has said." 
Tun Muhammad then sought leave to return to Malaka and 
the Raja of Pasai had a letter written in reply to that from the 
Raja of Malaka: this letter was borne in procession to Tun 
Muhammad's ship. 

Tuil Muhammad then set out for Malaka, where he arrived 
in due course. The letter from Pasai was borne in procession 
according to ancient custom to the hall of audience where it 
was read, and Tun Muhammad related to the king what the 
Raja of Pasai had said and all that had happened at Pasai. 
Sultan Mahmud Shah was well pleased with Tun Muhammad's 
account, and the answer the Sultan of Pasai had given met with 
his approval. And Tun Muhammad and Tun Bija Wangsa were 
presented by him with robes of honour with accessories such 
as are worn by princess and they received other rich rewards. 

Chapter XXI 

Legur invades Pahang, on instructions from Siam, and 
Sultan Mahmud sends a force to help Pahang, under the leader¬ 
ship of Bendahara Sri Maharaja accompanied by the Laksamana* 
Legur is defeated. The prosperity of Malacca. The visit of a 
Portuguese ship from Goa and the Malays* first meeting with 
Europeans whom they described as ‘white Bengalis*! The first 
attack of the Portuguese on Malacca. It is repelled. 

Here now is a story of the Raja of Legur, whose name was 
.Maharaja Dewa Sura. (Having been so commanded^ 29 by the 
Raja of Siam) he was making preparations to attack Pahang. 
When news of this reached Pahang, Sultan Mansur Shah, the 
Raja of Pahang, gave orders that the fort should be put in order 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



156 


The Malay Annals 

[ 180 — 181 ] for defence and that forces be assembled: all were to go into 
the fort and to put their weapons in order. When presently word 
reached Malaka that the Raja of Legur was going to attack 
Pahang on the orders of the Raja of Siam, Sultan Mahmud 
Shah sent for Bendahara Sri Maharaja, the Sri Bija 'diraja and 
the chiefs to consider what should be done about the attack on 
Pahang by the Raja of Legur. And the Sri Nara 'diraja said, 
"May it please your Highness, iff 030 we do not send men to 
assist Pahang (? , it will be unfortunate), for if anything should 
befall Pahang, will not that be to your Highness's detrimentf 031 ?" 
And Sultan Mahmud Shah replied, "In that case the Bendahara 
had better go to Pahang accompanied by the war-chiefs." "Very 
well, your Highness", said Bendahara Sri Maharaja, and he there¬ 
upon had shipsf 032 made ready. When the fleet was ready, 
the Bendahara was presented with robes of honour befitting his 
rank and he then set forth for Pahang, accompanied by the Sri 
Amar Bangsa, the Sri Utama, the Sri Petam (?), the Sri Nata, 
Sang Stia, Sang Naya, Sang Guna and Sang Jaya Pikrama; and 
with them went all the war-chiefs. 

And the ships, small and large, were past counting in number; 
for at that time the Raja's subjects in the city alone numbered 
ninetyf 633 thousand, to say nothing of those that dwelt in the out¬ 
lying territory. The Laksamanaf 634 was still at Sungai Raya, which 
was by custom the fief of the Laksamana; but when he had made 
ready his ship9 (the fleet of Sungai Raya at that time-was forty 
three-masted cruisers), he moved upstream towards Malaka. 
When he reached Batu Pahat, he came up with Bendahara Sri 
Maharaja and he went straightway to him. And Bendahara Sri 
Maharaja said to him. "Let us go to Pahang." But the Laksa¬ 
mana replied, "I have not yet received! 635 the royal command." 
"Even so", said the Bendahara, "I have received it." Then said 
the Laksamana, "I have not yet done homage." And Bendahara 
Sri Maharaja answered, "I have. Come let us go.": and at 
the same time he took the Laksamana's hand. There was 
nothing further the Laksamana could say and he set forth with 
the Bendahara. When they reached Pahang they found that 
one side! 636 of the fort remained unfinished. Bendahara Sri 
Maharaja and the war-chiefs went into the palace to present 
themselves before the Raja, who was well pleased to s'ee them 
and said, "There is one side of the fort still to be completed, 
sir,! 637 and I shall be glad if the men of Malaka will finish it." 
"It shall be done", answered Bendahara Sri Maharaja, and forth¬ 
with he gave orders for the men of Malaka to work on the 
fortifications under the supervision of the Laksamana. The 
Laksamana thereupon set the men of Malaka to work, and of 
himself at that time it could be said that his hands were busy, 
his feet were busy, his eyes were busy and his tongue was busy. 
With his tongue he had continually to be issuing orders; with 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



157 


translated by C. C. Brown 

his eyes he had to see what work was good and what work was 
bad; with his feet he had to go hither and thither, and with his 
hands he had rattans to trim. And by the goodness of God 
the fortifications were completed in three days. 

Presently the Raja of Legur arrived in Pahang with his 
army, in numbers beyond counting, and they fought with the 
men of Pahang. But by the grace of God Pahang was victorious 
and the forces of Legur were heavily punished by the men of 
Pahang and many were killed. And the Raja of Legur fled head¬ 
long to Ulu Pahang and made his way through to Patani and 
thence back to Legur. And Sultan Mansur Shah rewarded 
Bendahara Sri Maharaja and the Malaka war-chiefs, and presented 
them with robes of honour befitting their rank. Thereupon 
Bendahara Sri Maharaja sought leave of Sultan Mansur Shah to 
an< ^ h a d a letter written for submission to 

Malaka. Bendahara Sri Maharaja then set out on his return 
journey and on his arrival in due course at Malaka presented 
himself before Sultan Mahmud Shah, who was well pleased to 
hear of the victory of Pahang. 

Now the city of Malaka at that time flourished exceedingly 
and many foreigners resorted thither; so much so that from 
Ayer Leleh to IIulu Muar there was an unbroken line of habita¬ 
tions, and it was thus too from Kampong Kling to Kuala Penajeh 
People journeying even as far as Jenggra had no need to take 
firmgf 638 with them, for wherever they stopped on the way 
there would be a dwelling-house. Such was the greatness of 
Malaka at that time; in the city alone there were a hundred and 
ninety thousand people, to say nothing of the inhabitants of the 
outlying territories and coastal districts. 

After a while there came a ship of the Franks from Goa 
trading to Malaka: and the Franks perceived how prosperous 
and well populated the port was. The people of Malaka for 
their part came crowding to see what the Franks looked like; and 
they were all astonished and said, “These are white Bengalis!” 
Around each Frank there would be a crowd of Malays, 
some of them twisting his beard, some of them fingering his 
head, some taking off his hat, some grasping his hand. And the 
commander of the ship landed and presented himself before 
Bendahara Sri Maharaja, who adopted him as his son and gave 
him robes of honour, as befitted his rank, while the commander 
t 639 for his part presented Bendahara Sri Maharaja with a gold 
chain. 

And when the season came round (for the return journey) 
the commander went back to Goa, where he described to tne 
Viceroy the greatness of the city of Malaka, the prosperity of the 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



158 


The Malay Annals 

[ 182 — 183 ] port and the number of the inhabitants. The Viceroy at that 
time was one Alfonso cTAlbuquerque. When he realised (? the 
greatness of) Malaka, the Viceroy was seized with desiref 640 to 
possess it, and he ordered a fleet to be made ready consisting of 
seven carracks, ten long galleys and thirteen foysts. When the 
fleet was ready, he ordered it to attack Malaka. On arrival at 
Malaka the ships forthwith opened fire with their cannon. And 
the people of Malaka were bewildered and filled with fear at the 
sound of the cannon, and they said, “What sound is this like 
thunder?” And when presently the cannon balls began to arrive 
and struck the people of Malaka, so that some had their heads 
shot away, some their arms and some their legs, the people of 
Malaka were more and more astonished to see what manner of 
thing this artillery was, and they said, “What may be this round 
weapon that yet is sharp enough to kill us?” The next day the 
Franks landed two thousand men armed with matchlocks apart 
from a vast horde of sailors and sepoys: and the men of Malaka 
under the leadership of Tun Hasan Temenggong went out to 
repel them. And when they encountered the Franks, battle was 
engaged, (the flashes of firef 641 from the cannon being like flashes 
of lightning in the heaven?) and the weapons falling like 
heavy rain. Then Tun Hasan Temenggong and the men of 
Malaka charged; and the line of the Franks was broken and they 
gave ground. Then the men of Malaka charged again, and this 
time the Franks were routed and fled to the waterside, pursued 
by the men of Malaka. They then embarked and sailed for 
Goa. And when they reached Goa, they related to the Viceroy 
all that had happened. The Viceroy was very angry and was for 
ordering a fresh fleet to be made readyf 64la there and then for 
another attack on Malaka. But the commanderf 641a of the Moors 
dissuaded him, saying, “As long as Bendahara Sri Maharaja is alive, 
Malaka will never fall.” To which the Viceroy replied, “That 
beingf 642 so, wait till I am no longer Viceroy and I will go myself 
and attack Malaka!” 

God alone knoweth the truth. 

Chapter XXII 

The beauty of Tun Fatimah, daughter of Bendahara Sri 
Maharaja, who did not ‘shew* her to Sultan Mahmud and thereby 
incurred the royal displeasure. The wealth of the Bendahara. 
The lawsuit between Naina Sura Diwana and Raja Mendaliar 
which was to be heard by the Bendahara. One of the parties 
bribes the Bendahara, whereupon the other bribes the Laksa- 
mana to tell Sultan Mahmud Shah that the Bendahara is meditat- 
in a coup d’etat . This is Sultan Mahmud’s chance to work 
off the grudge he bears the Bendahara over Tun Fatimah and 
he orders the execution of the Bendahara, who is accordingly 
put to death along with his brother, the Sri Nara ‘diraja. When 
later Sultan Mahmud learns that the Laksamana s story was 
false, he is stricken with remorse and visits condign punishment 


Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



translated by C. C. Brown 


159 


[182—183] on the Laksamana and the man who bribed him. The old 

Paduka Tuan is then made Bendahara, much to his astonish¬ 
ment. His habits. Sultan Mahmud marries Tun Fatimah, 
but she mourns the death of her father and ‘never laughed or 
even smiled.’ So unhappy is Sultan Mahmud that he abdicates 
in favour of his son, Sultan Ahmad, and retires into seclusion 
with none to keep him company but his henchman Sang Sura. 

(SheJJabear, chapter XXXI and XXXII). 

Here now is a story of Bendahara Sri Maharaja's daughter. 
Tun Fatimah, whose beauty was such that she had no peer 
at that time. When she had reached marriageable age she had 
become moref 043 beautiful than ever, none could compare with 
her at that time. Moreover being the Bendahara's daughter she 
could wear what royal privilege denied to others. Bendahara 
Sri Maharaja proposed to marry her to Tun 'Ali, son of the Sri 
Nara 'diraja. And when the sireh f 644 was sent, Bendahara Sri 
Maharaja invited to his house the Raja di-Baroh, who was the uncle 
of Sultan Mahmud Shah and the eldest brother of Sultan 
Ala'u'd-din, and he shewed Tun Fatimah to him. When the 
Raja di-Baroh saw Tun Fatimah, he was dumbfounded by her 
beauty and said to Bendahara Sri Maharaja, "The Ruler—has he 
seen this daughter of yours?" When Bendahara Sri Maharaja 
replied that the Ruler had not yet set eyes on her, the Raja di- 
Baroh said, "If you will not be offended, Bendahara, there is 
something I would like to say to you." And Bendahara Sri 
Maharaja replied, "Say on, your Highness ."Then said the Raja di- 
Baroh, "This daughter of yours, Bendahara, is exceptionally 
beautiful, and to me it seems wrong that she should wed a man 
who is not of the blood royal. If you will take my advice, you 
will not give her in marriage yet awhile, for the Raja Perempuan, 
the Raja's consort from Pahang, is now dead and according to 
royal Malay custom, when there is no Raja Perempuan, it is the 
daughter of the Bendahara who becomes Raja Perempuan." But 
Bendahara Sri Maharaja answered, "No r your Highness, I am a 
man of presantf 045 stock and peasant should go with peasant." 
"Very well, Bendahara", said the Raja di-Baroh, "do as you please: 
I was only telling you what I thought." After that Bendahara Sri 
Maharaja proceeded to inaugurate the festivities for the marriage 
of his daughter. 

When the propitious time arrived for celebrating the wedding, 
Sultan Mahmud Shah was invited by Bendahara Sri Maharaja to 
be present at the ceremony, and he went to the Bendahara's 
house. As soon as Sultan Mahmud Shah arrived, the marriage 
of Tun ‘Ali and Tun Fatimah took place. Sultan Mahmud 
Shah then went into the inner room of the house to be present 
at the ceremony off 645a rice-taking, and when he saw Tun Fatimah 
he was astounded by her beauty and conceived a great desire for 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



160 


The Malay Annals 

£ 183 — 184 ] her. And he thought to himself, "What a knave this old Mutahir 
is! He has a daughter as lovely as this' and he has never shewn 
her to me!" There and then Sultan Mahmud bore malice in his 
heart against Bendahara Sri Maharaja. When the wedding was 
over he retired to the palace: but eat he would not, Tun Fatimah 
was never out of his thoughts; and day after day he sought to 
revenge himself on the Bendahara. After Tun ‘Ali had been 
married to Tun Fatimah for a while she bore him a daughter 
called Tunf 64G Trang, quite a pretty girl. 

Here now is the story of a certain man of Kalinga living 
in Malaka at that'time, who had been made Master of the Port, 
with the title of Raja Mendaliar, and was easily the richestf 647 man 
of his time in Malaka. It happened one day that he was present 
before Bendahara Sri Maharaja and the Bendahara said to him, 
"Now then, Raja Mendaliar, let us have the truth from you! 
How much are you worth?" And Raja Mendaliar answered, "I 
am not worth all that amount, your Highness, I have but five 
bahara of gold." To which Bendahara Sri Maharaja replied, 
"Then I am worth only one more bahara than you, Raja Menda¬ 
liar." Bendahara Sri Maharaja was in fact always engaging in 
business and never once did he come to grief in any of his enter¬ 
prises. If he was in a goodf 048 humour (?) he would call the 
children of the household and say to them, "Would you boys 
likef 649 to see some gold?" And when they said they would 
Bendahara Sri Maharaja would say," Go and fetch that chest 
yonderf 650 ." Then they would go and fetch the chest, carrying 
it between them, and lay it before Bendahara Sri Maharaja, who 
would order the contents to be poured out on to the mat and 
measured out with a gallon measure. Then he would say to the 
children, "Take a handful each to play with !" They would 
grasp a handful each and take it to the house which Bendahara 
Sri Maharaja was building. Then they would put the gold 
on the crossbeams or wall-planking which the carpenters were 
shapingf G50ft to go into position; after which they would leave 
the house. But when the men who who were working on the 
house came to work, they would see the gold and take it. Later, 
whent G50b the children remembered their gold, they would go 
back into the house to get the gold they had just put there so 
that they might play with it. Then they would see that the 
gold had disappeared and they would burst into tears. When 
Bendahara Sri Maharaja heard them crying, he would ask what 
they were crying about. And when he was told they had lost 
the gold he had just given them, he would say, "Don't cry! 
Tell me the truth f 051 and you shall have some more gold to 
take its place !" And he would give them another handful each. 

When the Bendahara's young folk went hunting wild 
buffalo or deer, if they had no sport they would stop on their 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



161 


translated by C. C. Brown 

D® 4 — 1 ® 5 1 way at the Bendahara's byre, spear two or three buffaloes, order 
their throats to be cut, take the topside meat and have it sent to 
the Bendahara. And when he asked what meat it was, the men 
who brought it would say, "Buffalo, your Highness. Your sons 
and grandsons went out hunting just now but getting nothing 
they stopped on their way at your Highness's byre at Kayu Ara 
and took a buffalo (? each)! 052 ". Then the Bendahara would 
say, "The naughty young brats. That's what they always do, if 
they go hunting buffalo and get none, they hunt my buffaloes 
in the byre!" 

If a slave of the Bendahara's came (to visit him) from the 
country, all dressed up for the occasion in scarlet jacket and 
rainbow headcloth, he would invite him into his house thinking 
he was a foreigner. And when he had come in, the Bendahara 
would ask him, "And who are you, sir?" Then the man would 
say, "I am your slave, son of so and so, grandson of so and so!" 
Then the Bendahara would say, "Oh, you'ref 653 the son of so and 
so are you? Go down and sit under the house." Such was the 
grandeurf 65 * of Bendahara Sri Maharaja. And he would think 
to himself, "So great is my wealth that even when it goes to mv 
descendants they will not exhaust it!" 

It happened once on a festival day that the Bendahara and 
the chiefs had gone to the palace and were seated jn the hall of 
audience waiting for the Raja to appear. And Raja Mendaliar, 
who had come to presentf 635 himself before thq Raja, did obei¬ 
sance to the Bendahara. But the Bendahara flung aside his hands, 
saying, "That's just what one would expect from a Kling who 
doesn t know how to behave! The idea of paying your, respects 
to me here in the king’s hall! Couldn'tf 030 you come to my 
house to do that?" And Raja Mendaliar said not a word and 
withdrew. 

Subsequently a certain Naina Sura Dewana, the leading 
merchant in the city, had a claim against Raja Mendaliar and the 
two of them went and laid the matterf 657 before the Bendahara. 
But when they appeared it was already near afternoon and the 
Bendahara said, Go home now, gentlemen, for it is afternoon, 
and come back here to-morrow." Raja Mendaliar and Naina 
Dewana accordingly did obeisance to the Bendahara and sought 
his leave to depart, and they then went home. But Naina Sura 
Dewana thought to himself "This Raja Mendaliar is a rich man. 
If he gives the Bendahara a present, I shall certainly lose my 
case. That being so, I had better go and see the Bendahara 
to-night!" Having thus decided, when night fell Naina Sura 
Dewana took a bahara of gold and went with it to the house of 
Bendahara Sri Maharaja. When he came to the Bendahara's 
fence he asked the gate-keeper to tell the Bendahara that Naina 
Sura Dewana would like to see him. The gate-keeper forthwith 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



162 


The Malay Annals 


[185 — 186] informed Bendahara Sri Maharaja, who came out into his public 
hall. Naina Sura Dewana then went in and presented himself 
before Bendahara Sri Maharaja, and besought him to accept the 
bahara of gold, saying, "Your Highness, I crave your acceptance 
of this gold for whatever use you may have for it.” And Benda¬ 
hara Sri Maharaja answered, "Very well, as it is your gift to me, 
sir, I take it.” Naina Sura Dewana then sought the Bendaliara's 
leave to depart and betook himself to his house. 

Now there was a certain man of Kalinga named Kittul, who 
was related to Naina Sura Dewana, and he owed a catty (?)! 658 
of gold to Raja Mendaliar. When Naina Sura Dewana 
returned from the house of Bendahara Sri Maharaja, at midnight, 
Kittul went to the house of Raja Mendaliar and knocked! 659 
loudly on the door. Raja Mendaliar was startled and called out, 
"who's that at the door?” And Kittul answered, "It is I, Kittul.” 
Raja Mendaliar then ordered the door to be opened and Kittul 
came in. When he saw Raja Mendaliar happily in the company 
of his family! 660 , Kittul said, "You do well to be enjoying yourself 
this night, Raja Mendaliar, not knowing the misfortune that is 
coming upon you!” Raja Mendaliar then took Kittul by the 
hand and led him away to a place where they could be alone. 
Then he said, "Now then, Kittul, what is! 661 this that you've 
heard?” And Kittul replied, "This very night Naina Sura 
Dewana went to the Bendahara and gave him a bahara of gold 
to have! 662 you put to death. The Bendahara is now in collusion 
with Naina Sura Dewana and he will make an end! 602a of you!” 
When Raja Mendaliar heard what Kittul told him he took^Kittul's 
bond and tore it in shreds, saying "Your debt to me of a catty 
.of gold is remitted in this world and the next, and I regard you 
as my brother! 6620 .” Kittul then went home. That same night 
Raja Mendaliar took a bahara of gold, fine jewels and rich orna^ 
ments and went with them to the house of Laksamana Khoja 
Husain, because Laksamana Khoja Husain and his kinsmen were 
in high favour with Sultan Mahmud Shah. And when he came 
to the Laksamana's fence he asked for the gate to be opened and 
the Laksamana ordered that it should be opened. Raja Mendaliar 
then went in and presenting himself before the Laksamana sought 
his acceptance of all that he had brought, saying, "I am come into 
your presence, sir, because I have a duty to perform. It is neces¬ 
sary that you inform His Highness the Ruler, so that I may not 
be accused of complicity with him that is set over me, that it 
has come to my knowledge that Bendahara Sri Maharaja intends 
treason and has had a royal! 663 throne made for^ himself, his 
purpose being to make himself Raja here in Malaka. When the 
Laksamana set eyes on all the rich treasure that was being offered 
to him, his discretion forsook him, prey! 664 to the good things of 
this world: and he said to Raja Mendaliar, "Yes, I will inform 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



translated by C. C. Brown 165 : 

[186—187] His Highness the Ruler.” He then went into the palace and 
presented himself before Sultan Mahmud Shah, to whom he: 
related what Raja Mendaliar had told him. 

Sultan Mahmud Shah lent] 005 a ready ear to the Laksamana's 
story because lie had long harboured malice against Bendahara 
Sri Maharaja over his daughter: and he accordingly ordered 
Tun Sura 'diraja and Tun Indra Segara to put Bendahara Sri 
Maharaja to death. The two men went therefore (to the Benda- 
hara's house) accompanied by the Raja's slaves. (When they 
arrived) Bendahara Sri Maharaja's people and kinsmen gathered 
round him, all of them fully armed: and Tun Hasan Temenggong, 
the Bendahara's son, was for fighting. But the Bendahara said, 
"What, Hasan, would you be disloyal to your Raja and spoil the 
good namef 0(5(5 of your forebears? It is the custom of Malays that 
they shall never be disloyal to their Raja.'' When he heard 
Bendahara Sri Maharaja's words, Tun Hasan Temenggong threw 
away his weapon and stood with his arms folded. And the 
Bendahara said to his kinsmen and retainers, "If any of you 
resists, I will denounce him in the world to come!'' When they 
heard the words of (Bendahara) Sri Maharaja, all of them threw 
away their weapons and returned each to his house, leaving; 
Bendahara Sri Maharaja with his brother, the Sri Nara 'diraja, 
and his people. Then Tun Sura 'diraja and Tun Indra Segara^ 
came in bearing a creese from Sultan Mahmud Shah which had 
been placed on a salver and covered with a shoulder-cloth. They 
then took the creese out from under its covering (? and laid it) 
before the Bendahara, saying. "His Highness's] 667 greetings and 
prayers to God, verily the Will of Almighty God cometh to pass 
on this day." And" Bendahara Sri Maharaja and the Sri Nara 
'diraja answered, "Whatever cometh to pass in accordance with 
God's decree, I accept." Then were put to death Bendahara Sri 
Maharaja, the Sri Nara 'diraja and all of their people who accepted 
to die with them. At that moment Sang Suraf 068 came running 
from the palace with a royal command for Sang (? Tun) Sura, 
"the Ruler commands that the family be not utterly wiped out 
but that some be left to carry on the line." Then said Tun Sura 
(‘diraja) and Tun (Indra) Segara, “What is to be done? We 
shall incur the Ruler's displeasure, we have killed all butf 009 the 
children (?)!" And Tun Indra Segara said, "This child, Enche" 
Hamzah here, let us tend- him, we mayf 669a still be able to save 
his life." The Tun Hamzah of whom he spoke was the son of 
the Sri Nara 'diraja and he had been gashed] 6696 from the nape of 
his neck to the nipples. Tun Sura 'diraja forthwith took Tun 
Hamzah to Sultan Mahmud Shah who ordered that he be treated 
by- a doctor. By the will of Almighty God the child did not 
die. and he was to become in timef 670 a great favourite of Sultan 
Mahmud Shah's. After the death of Bendahara Sri Maharaja 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



164 


The Malay Annals 

t 1 ® 7 — 18 ®1 all the property that he leftf 671 was taken to the palace, 
and Sultan Mahmud Shah then realised that the story 
about the Bendahara was false. He was prostrated with 
grief and repented bitterly that he had put Bendahara Sri Maha¬ 
raja to death without due inquiry. And he ordered that Raja 
Mendaliar be put to death for having made a false accusation, that 
Kittul be impaled horizontally and the Laksamana castrated. The 
Paduka Tuan, son of Bendahara Paduka Raja, was made Benda¬ 
hara by Sultan Mahmud Shah. The Paduka Tuan was already 
an old man andf 672 paralysed (?) as well, and he had lost all his 
teeth. When he was told that he was being made Bendahara, 
he tumbled himself down from where he sat, saying, "A fine 
sort of Bendahara this will be, crippled and paralysed!” (And he 
begged to be excused from accepting the appointment, but) 
Sultan Mahmud Shah insisted f 073 that he should become Benda¬ 
hara. It was he who was known afterwards as Bendahara Lubok 
Tanah (? Batu) 'the man of many children/ for he had thirty-two 
children, all of them by the same mother, and his grandchildren 
and great-grandchildren numbered seventy-four. 

His eldest son was called Tun Bayazid. Tun Bayazid was 
slightly deranged. If he went to the market he would take any¬ 
thing he saw. When Bendahara Lubok Batu came to hear of 
this, he gave orders that if Tun Bayazid went out for a walk, he 
should be followed by one of the Bendahara s servants bearing 
money. This servant took note of any stall that Tun Bayazid 
stopped at and when Tun Bayazid had gone on, the servant 
would go to the stall and ask, "What did the gentleman take just 
now?” And when the stall-owner replied that he had taken so 
and so, the servant who followed Tun Bayazid would ask what 
was the price of the goods: and when the stall-owner said it was 
such and such a price, the servant would pay accordingly. 

There was an elephant which the Bendahara had given to 
him. This elephant Tun Bayazid had sold fourteen or fifteen 
times. When Bendahara Luook Batu heard that the elephant 
had been sold by Tun Bayazid, he would buy it back again and 
give it to anotherf 674 or his sons. When Tun Bayazid saw 
his brother riding the elephant, he would make him dismount, say¬ 
ing, "This is my elephant, father gave it to me!” Then he would 
take the elephant, but after he had had it for two or three months, 
he would sell it again. When the Bendahara came to know, he 
would buy it back again. This happened time after time. Thrice 
was Tun Bayazid bound by his father for slapping the face of one 
of the Raja's slaves. The Bendahara at last told the Sriwa Raja 
to bind Tun Bayazid and take him to the palace: and he said, 
"Do you, Sriwa Raja, ask the Ruler to put him to death, for what 
use is a gallows-bird like this? I would Killf 674a his myself but the 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



translated by C. C. Brown 165 

[188—189] Ruler might be displeased' ". The Sriwa Raja accordingly took 
Tun Bayazid to the palace and related to Sultan Mahmud Shah 
what the Bendahara had said. And Sultan Mahmud Shah 
remarked, "What oddf 675 things the Bendahara does! Merely 
on account of a slave he binds his own son! Let him go!" So 
Tun Bayazid was released and was given robes of honour by 
Sultan Mahmud Shah and told to return to the Bendahara. And 
when the Sriwa Raja told the Bendahara what the Raja had said, 
the Bendahara observed, "That's just like the Ruler! Bayazid has 
only to be bound for the Ruler to order his release and give 
him robes of honour! That'll make Bayazid more of a gallows- 
bird than ever!" When the Bendahara’s back was turned, Tun 
Bayazid said to the young men around him, "When my father 
binds me, he shews a nice sense of colour! When I was wearing 
a dark red jacket, he bound me with a cloth that had a green 
ground; when I was wearing a white jacket, he bound me with a 
cloth that had a red ground; and when I was wearing a purple 
jacket, he bound me with a cloth that had a yellow ground! 
And all the young men laughed at this sally of Tun Bayazid s. 

Another son of Bendahara Lubok Batu was called Khojaf 076 
Ahmad; it was he who was given the title of Tun Pikrama (Wira) 
and he was the father of Tunf G77 Isak Berakah. 

Another son of Bendahara Lubok Batu was called Tun Pauh: 
he was the father of Tun Jamal; Tun Jamal had many children. 
The eldest, was called Tun Utusan: then came Tun Bakau, Tun 
Menawar and Tun Sulaiman, who was made Sri Guna 'diraja: 
then came a daughter called Tun Seni, who was married to 
Tun Tiram, son of Sang Stia: then another daughter who was 
married to Tun Bayazid Itam and had a son, Tun Mat 'Ali. Tun 
Bakau had four (?) children; Tun Bayazid Ibrahim, Tun Bentan 
and Tun Abu, who was made Sri Bijaya Pikrama. Tun Menawar 
had four children; Tun Buang, Tun Husain, who was made 
Paduka Sri Raja Muda; Tun Hasan, who was made Sri 
Pikrama Raja; and a daughter who married Tun Bentan. 
The Sri Guna 'diraja too had many children; Tun Mat, 
Tun Boh, Tun Pekoh, 'zid Boh and (? Tun) 'zid. 

Another child of Bendahara Lubok Batu, a daughter, was 
married to Tun Perpateh Kasim, by whom she had a daughter, 
Tun Putri. Tun Putri married Tun Iman 'diraja, by whom 
she had a son Tun Tahir. It was Tun Tahir wno was made 
Sri Pikrama Raja of Batu Sawar. 

Now the daughter of Bendahara Sri Maharaja named Tun 
Fatimah, who was so beautiful, was taken by Sultan Mahmud 
Shah to be his consort, and he was deeply enamoured of her. 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 




166 


The Malay Annals 

[*89—190] gut Tun Fatimah sadly mourned her father^ and throughout her 
married life with Sultan Mahmud Shah never once did she 
laugh or even smile. As was her sadness, sof 678 was the 
king's; and he bitterly repented what he had done. And he 
abdicated from the throne in favour of his son Sultan Ahmad, 
to whom he made over his officers and the regalia. And Sultan 
Mahmud Shah (went and) took up his abode at Kayu Ara, with 
no one but Sang Suraf 079 to keep him company. 

According to the account we have received, whenever Sultan 
Mahmud Shah went for a ride to Tanjong Kling or elsewhere, 
it was Sang Sura alone that escorted him, carrying three things: 
first the betel-set, second a package and third a water bottle. If 
Sultan Ahmad heard that his father was going out riding, he 
would order the chiefs to escort him. But no sooner did 
Sultan Mahmud Shah see people coming to escort him than he 
would set spurs to his horse and gallop away, refusing to be 
escorted by the chiefs. And Sang Sura would run at top speed 
keeping up with the kings horse; and as he ran he would place 
his footprints over the hoofmarks of the horse so as to obliterate 
them and prevent their being seen; and at the same time in 
the palm of his hand he made betel quids for his royal master. 
Thus lived Sultan Mahmud Shah in retirement. 

When Sultan Ahmad became Raja he had no great liking 
for the chiefs. His favourites were Tun 'Ali Hati, Tun Mai 'Ulat 
Bulu and Tun Muhammad Rahang together with the young 
men about the court, thirteen of them, and the king's slaves. 
They were his companions in sport and pastime. This Tun Mai 
Ulat Bulu was the son of (Tun) Zainu'UAbidin, who was the 
son of Bendahara Paduka Raja, who lived at Lubok China and was 
known as Datok Lubok China. Tun Zainu'UAbidin had five 
children; three sons, of whom the eldest was Tun Salehu'd-din, 
the second Tun Jalalu'ddin and the youngest Tun Mahaiyi d-din: 
the daughter was married to Bendahara Sri Maharaja. Tun 
Salehu’d-din begat Tun Tahiru'd-din and Tun Tahiru'd-din 
begat Orang Kaya Sogoh and the father of Tun Sulaiman. Tun 
Jalalu'd-din begat Tun Mai; who was known as Tun Mai Ulat 
Bulu. It was he who was a great favourite of Sultan Mahmud 
f (579a Shah's, and he was made Temenggong with the title of Sri 
Awadana. 

Sultan Mahmud Shah was deeply attached to Tun Fatimah 
and he ordered that she should be called Raja Perempuan. But 
if she became pregnant by Sultan Mahmud Shah, she caused 
abortion. When this had happened two or three times Sultan 
Mahmud Shah asked her, "Why is it that when you are with 
child you cause abortion? Is it that you dislike bearing a child 
to me?" And Tun Fatimah answered, "Why should you want 
children of me any longer when you already have a son on the 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



167 


translated by C. C. Brown 

J190—191] throne?” And Sultan Mahmud Shah said> "Even so, if you 
conceive by me, let the child be born: if it be a son, it is 
hef 080 that we will make Raja.” In the course of time Tun 
Fatimah again became pregnant, but she did not cause abortion 
and when the time came, she bore a daughter of great beautv< 
As soon as the daughter was born, Sultan Mahmud Shah took 
her in his arms and kissed her, and he gave her the name of 
Raja Puteh. She was his favourite child, his affection, 
for her was indescribable. Sultan Mahmud Shah had another 
daughter by Tun Fatimah: she was called Raja Khatijah. 
During this time Sultan Mahmud Shah (? Ahmadf 681 ) con- 
.stantly pursued his studies with Makhdum Sadar Jahan. 

Chapter XXIII 

d’Albuquerque attacks Malacca. The bravery of Sultan 
Ahmad in the face of an attack which is not to the liking of 
his tutor, Makhdum Sadar Jahan. The incident of the Hikayat 
Muhammad Hanafiah and the Hikayat Hamzah. Sultan Ahmad 
is wounded and the Malacca defenders are stirred to fresh efforts 
but Malacca falls and Sultan Ahmad flees to Pahang and finally 
to Bentan, accompanied by his father. His conduct offends 
Sultan Mahmud who has him murdered and resumes the throne, 
Sultan Mahmud sets up a new administration at Bentan and 
appoints as his successor his son by Tun Fatimah, thereby dis¬ 
placing Raja Muzaffar Shah. 

(SheJlabear, chapter XXXIV) 

Here now is a story of Fongso d’Albuquerque. At the end 
of his term of offipe as viceroy he proceeded to Pertugal and 
presenting himself before the Raja of Pertugal asked for an 
armadaf 082 . The Raja of Pertugal gave him four carracks and 
five long galleys. He then returned from Pertugal and fittedf 683 
out a fleet at Goa, consisting of three carracks, eight galeasses, 
four long galleys and fifteen foysts. There were thus forty 
(sic) craft in all. With this fleet he sailed for Malaka. And 
when he reached Malaka, there was great excitement and word 
was brought to Sultan Ahmad, "The Franks are come to attack 
us! They have seven carracks, eight galeasses, ten long galleys, 
fifteen sloops and five foysts.” Thereupon Sultan Ahmad 
had all his forces assembled and he ordered them to make ready 
their equipment. And the Franks engaged the men of Malaka 
in battle, and they fired their cannon irom their ships so that 
the cannon balls came like rain. And the noise of the cannon 
Avas as the noise of thunder in the heavens and the flashes of 
fire of their guns were like flashes of lightning in the sky: and 
the noise of their matchlocks was like that of ground-nutsf 083a 
popping in the frying-pan. So heavy was the gun-fire that the 
men of Malaka could no longer maintain their position on the 
shore. The Franks then bore down upon the bridge with their 
galleys and foysts. Thereupon Sultan Ahmad came forth, 
mounted on his elephant Jituji, 

J952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



168 


The Malay Annals 

f 191 — 192 I The Sri Awadana was on the elephant's head, and to balance 
him on 4:he packsaddle Sultan Ahmad took him (Makhdum 
Sadar Jahan because he was studying the doctrine of the Unity 
of God with him. On the elephant's croup was Tun ‘Ali Hati. 

And the king went forth on to the bridge and stood there 
amid a hail of bullets. But Makhdum Sadat Jahan clasping the 
pannier with both hands cried out to Sultan Ahmad Shah "Sultan, 
this is no place to study the Unity of God, let us go home!'* 
Sultan Ahmad smiled and returned to the palace. And the 
Franks shouted from their ships, "Take warning, you men of 
Malaka, to-morrow we land!",And the men of Malaka answered* 
"Very well!" 

Sultan Ahmad Shah then sent out men to assemble! 080 all 
his forces and bidf 080a them get ready their arms. That night the 
war-chiefs and the young nobles were waiting in the hall of 
audience, and the young nobles said, "Why do we sit here idly?f G86l> 
It would be well for us to read a tale of war that we may 
profit from it." And Tun Muhammad Unta said, "That is very 
true, sir. Let us ask the Raja to give us the Story of Muhammad 
Hanafiah." Then the young nobles said to Tun Aria, "Go, sir, 
and take this message to the Ruler, that all of us crave from him 
the Storyf 087 of Muhammad Hanafiah, in the hope that we may 
obtain profit from it, for the Franks are attacking tomorrow." 
Tun Aria accordingly went into the palace and presented him¬ 
self before Sultan Ahmad, to whom he addressed the young 
nobles' request. And Sultan Ahmad gave him the Story of 
Hamzahf 088 saying, "We would give you the Story of Muham¬ 
mad Hanafiah did we not fear that the bravery of the gentlemen 
of our court falls short of the bravery of Muhammad Hanafiah! 
But it may be that their bravery is such as was the bravery of 
Hamzah and that is why we give you the Story of Hamzah." 

Tun Aria then left the palace 1 bearing the Story of Hamzah 
and he told the young nobles what Sultan Ahmad had said. At 
first they were silent, but presently Tun Isak Berakah replied to 
Tun Aria, "Represent humbly to the Ruler that he has spoken 
amiss. If he will be as Muhammad Hanafiah, we will be as 
war-chief Bania' (Beniar): if! 089 his bravery is as that of Muham¬ 
mad Hanafiah, ours will be as that of war-chief Bania'." And 
when Tun Aria took this message from Tun Isak Berakah to 
Sultan Ahmad, the king smiled and gave them the Story of 
Muhammad Hanafiah instead. 

When day dawned, the Franks landed and attacked. And 
Sultan Ahmad mounted his elephant Juru Demang, with the Sri 
Awadana on the elephant's head and Tun ‘Ali Hati balancing 
the king on the packsaddle. The Franks then fiercely engaged 
the men of Malaka in battle and so vehement was their onslaught 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



169 


translated by C. C. Brown 

[192 193 ] that the Malaka line was broken, leaving the king on his elephant 
isolated (?)f C9 °. And the king fought with the Franks pike to 
pike, and he was wounded in the palm of the hand. And he 
shewedf 691 the palm of his hand, saying “See this, Malays!” 
And when they saw that Sultan Ahmad was wounded in the 
hand, the war-chiefs returned to the attack and fought the 
Franks. 

And Tun Salehu’d-din called upon Orang Kaya Sogoh to 
fight with the Franks pike to pike. And Tun SaleWd-din was 
struck in the chest and killed, and twenty of the leadingf 692 war- 
chiefs were killed. The Sri Awadana was wounded in the 
groin, so the elephant was made to kneel and he was put on a 
litter. Sultan Ahmad ordered him to be examined by a doctor, 
who explored the wound with the pointed endf 693 of a sireh 
leaf and said, “All is well, the wound can be treated. But had 
it been half a rice grain deeper, the Sri Awadana would have 
died.” And Malaka fell. The Franks advanced on the King's 
audience hallf 094 (?) and the men of Malaka fled. Bendahara 
Lubok Batu was borne off the field by one Selamat Gagah, closely 
pursued by the Franks. And the Bendahara said to the man 
who was bearing him,” “Hurl me against the Franks!” But his 
family would not allow this. Whereupon the Bendahara cried, 
“What cowards these young men are! If I was still a young 
man, I would die fighting for Malaka!” 

Sultan Ahmad then withdrew to Hulu Muar and thence 
to Pagoh. Sultan Mahmud Shah had taken up his abode at 
Batu Hampar. Sultan Ahmad then established a fort at Ben- 
tayan. Meanwhile the Franks occupied Malaka where they 
turned the royal demesne into a fort; which fort is there to this 
day. Then the Franks advanced to Muar and attacked Pagoh, 
which fell after several days fighting; and Sang Stia was killed. 
Sultan Ahmad then withdrew to Hulu Muar. In Muar the Ben¬ 
dahara died: he was buried at Lubok Batu, whereafter he was 
known as Datok Lubok Batu. After a while Sultan Ahmad and 
his father, Sultan Mahmud Shah, left Hulu Muar and wentf 695 
on to Pahang, where they were welcomed by the Raja of Pahang. 
Sultan Mahmud Shah gave his daughter by his Kelantan consort 
in marriage to the Raja of Pahang whose name was Sultan 
Mansur Shah. From Pahang Sultan Ahmad went to Bentan and 
established a settlement at Kopakf 696 . 

Sultan Ahmad still had no love for his officers and chiefs: 
his favourites were the (young) men of the court of whom we 
have already made mention. When these young gentlemen 
dined at the palace, their food was hand-fed f 697 fowl, rice cooked 
with turmeric, suet. Then when the officers of state and the 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



,170 


The Malay Annals 


£193—194] chiefs came to present themselves before Sultan Ahmad, the 

young men would say, "Where is that turmeric rice we had just 

now? Where are the remains of that hand-fed fowl we ate just 

now?’' When Sultan Mahmud Shah came to hear how his 
son was behaving, he was displeased and gave orders to makef 697a 
away with him. Upon the death of Sultan Ahmad, his father, 
Sultan Mahmud Shah, became Raja. And he called togetherf 698 
all the young nobles and the slaves of Sultan Ahmad and said to 
them, "Let none of you be afraid. As you were with Ahmad, 
so shall you be with me." And they answered, "Very well, your 
Highness. Whatever be your Highness's bidding, there shall 
we be (to do it)." Sultan Mahmud Shah then sent for Tun 'Ali 

Hati. But Tun 'Ali Hati refused to come, saying, "As for me, 

it was your Highness’s son who befriended me. If he had met 

his death at a foeman’s hand, assuredly I would have died with 
him. As it is what am I to do? It is by the will of your 
Highness that the 'heavensf 090 have fallen upon the earth’, and 
as Malay subjects are never disloyal, I can only ask that I be put 
to death." When Sultan Mahmud Shah was informed of what 
Tun 'Ali Hati, had said he replied, "Tell 'Ali Hati, if Ahmadf 699 ® 
was a good friend to him, so will I be. Why does he talk in 
this way? I have no wish to put him to death!" What the 
Raja said was communicated to Tun 'Ali Hati, who replied, "What 
I would ask is that I may be put to death all the same, for I 
have no wish to serve another master." In vain did the king 
endeavour to persuade him not to throw away his life, 
Tun 'Ali Hati refused and only asked to be put to death. 
At last therefore Sultan Mahmud Shah ordered that he be put to 
death. Sultan Mahmud Shah now set about organizing the 
administration of his kingdom. Tun Pekermaf 700 (sic), the 
Bendahara’s son, was made Bendahara, with the title of Paduka 
Raja: the Sri Amarabangsa, grandson of Bendahara Puteh, was 
made Chief Minister and sat (in the hall of audience) opposite 
the Bendahara. [This Sri Amarabangsa was the father of Tun Abu 
Isahak, who was the father of Tun Abu Bakar. Tun Abu Bakar 
under the Johor empire held the title of Sri Amarabangsa. His 
brother was named Orang Kaya Tun Muhammad and he was the 
father of Orang Kaya Tun Undan and Orang Kaya Tun Sulat]. 
Tun Isakf 701 was given the title of Paduka Tuan: and Tun 
Hamzah,f 702 the son of the Sri Nara 'diraja, was made Treasurer, 
with the title of Sri Nara 'diraja. It was he who was a great 
favourite of Sultan Mahmud Shah. Tun Biajit Rupa, son of 
Bendahara Sri Maharaja, was made a minister of state with the 
title of Sri Utama. It was he who was the father of Tun Dolah. 
Tun '!Umar, son of Sri Maharajaf 703 (sic), was also made a 
minister of state, with the title of Sri Petam. Tunf 703a Muhammad, 
the brother of the Sri Nara 'diraja, was made Chief Herald, with 
the title of Tun Nara Wangsa: and the son of the Paduka Tuan 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



translated by C. C. Brown 171 

I 194 — 195 1 who was called Tun Mat was given the title of Tun Pekerma Wira. 

Laksamanaf 704 Khoja Husain had died in sorrow and was 
buried on Bukit Pantau. It was he who was known subsequently 
as 'Laksamana Pantau'. Hang Nadim was then made Laksamana. 
It was he who gained great fame as a warrior and fought in 
thirty-two fights in which blood was shed by the bucketfulf 765 . He 
married a cousinf 70r>a of Bendahara Lubok Batu and by her he had 
a son named Tun Mat 'Ali. (On the death of Sultan Ahmad) 
Sultan Mahmud Shah designated his son Raja Muzaffar Shah 
as his successor on the throne: and he married him with Tun 
Trang, grand-daughter of Bendahara Sri Maharaja and daughter of 
Tun Fatimah by Tun 'Ali. And whenever Raja Muzaffar Shah 
sat in the hall with people before him, there was laid for him 
first a spread-out mat and then a rugf 706 . On the rug there was a 
sitting-mat and on the topf 706a of all the royal cushion. Thereon 
he sat. Now Tun Fatimah was again with child: and when her time 
was accomplished, she brought forth a very good-looking son, 
whom Sultan Mahmud Shah named Raja Ala’u’d-din Shah. No 
sooner was this prince born than the royal cushion of Raja 
Muzaffar Shah was removed. And when Sultan Ala’u’d-din was 
seven days old, his father had his headf 70Gb shaved, whereupon the 
rug of Raja Muzaffar Shah was removed and he was left with 
nothing to sit upon except a mat such as ordinary people use. And 
when he was forty days old Sultan Ala’u’d-din was named by Sultan 
Mahmud Shad as his successor on the throne, to be styled Sultan 
Muda. And when in due course he reached man’s estate Sultan 
Muda shewed himself to be a prince of very kindly disposition (?). 

God knoweth the truth. 

Chapter XXIV 

Sultan 4 Abdullah, Raja of Kampar, refuses to visit Sultan 
Mahmud in Bentan or to own allegiance to him any longer: and 
fearing reprisals he seeks the assistance of the Portuguese. 
Sultan Mahmud orders an attack on Kampar, but the Malay 
fleet is worsted by the Portuguese and the Malays seek refuge 
in Indragiri where Tun Biajit beats all comers at cockfighting, 
including the Raja himself. Sultan ‘Abdullah is taken prisoner 
by the Portuguese and sent first to Goa and then to Portugal. 
Sultan Mahmud sends for Sultan ‘Abdullah’s chiefs and vents 
his wrath upon them. (Part of this chapter will be found m 
Shellabear , ch. XXXIV) 

Here now is a story of Sultan 'Abdullah, the Raja of 
Kamparf 707 , who had become disloyal and refused to acknowledge 
Sultan Mahmud as overlord or to present himself before him at 
Bentan. And he sent envoys to Malaka asking for the assistance 
of the Franks. This assistance was given by the Commandant of 
Malaka; which prompted subsequently the verse 

J952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



[ 195 — 196 ] 


172 The Malay Annals 

Tugf 708 and lug, strain every nerve] 709 
To lop a cubit’s length of kandis*: 

How mad must be this petty king 

To leave the sweet and toothsome manggisV 

Because he sees a hartal t ripe! 

When Sultan Mahmud Shah heard about Raja 'Abdullah he was 
very angry and ordered an expedition to be fitted out for an 
attack on Kampar. Those who were appointed to go were forty 
ministers of state; first, the Sri Amarabangsa; second, the Sri 
Utama; third, the Sri Petam; fourth, the Sri Nara; fifth, Tun] 709 * 
Biajit, a son of Laksamana Hang Tuah (? and) the war-chiefs. 
When the fleet was ready, the expedition set out, with the Sri 
Amarabangsa in command. And when they reached Kerumutan,. 
the Franks who were on their way to assist Kampar with ten 
foysts and five brigantines encountered the Malay fleet and battle 
was engaged. After fierce fighting the Malay fleet was routed and 
all aboard the ships took to the water and came ashore at Keru¬ 
mutan, whence they made their way to Indragiri. [When they 
took to the water Tun Biajit’s mistress brought nothing away 
with her but one of Tun Biajit’s cock-spurs. All who had 
mistresses with them bundled them up in matting for the march 
and made the crewt 709b carry them on their shoulders: then when 
they came to a stopping-place on the march, the bundles were 
opened.] 

After a march of some days they reached Indragiri, whereupon 
the Sri Amarabangsa, the Sri Utama, the Sri Petam, the Sri Nara 
Tun Biajit and all the rest of the defeated company presented 
themselves before Sultan Narasinga] 7090 who bestowed bounty 
upon them, to each man according to his rank. Tun Biajit sought 
out the best gamecock he could find and when he had tended] 71 ** 
it he went in for cock-fighting with it. When the men of 
Menangkabau saw Tun Biajit cock-fighting, they challenged him. 
And he accepted their challenges and fought them, sometimes 
winning, sometimes losing but more often winning. The 
Menangkabau people then joined together] 711 to defeat Tun 
Biajit (?). Raja Narasinga had a cock that had been brought 
from Menangkabau. This cock had been taken round thirty cities 
by its owner for a match, but no one would accept the challenge. 
It weighed ten tahils ] 711a and the owner ] 711b would say, “For 
a fight with this cock of mine the challenger must put up its 
weight in gold as the] 711c stakes.” When Raja Narasinga bade 
Tun Biajit pit his cock against this one, Tun Biajit agreed and 
proceeded to look for a-cock. When he had found one to his 
liking, he got it ready for the ring and then challenged the 
Menangkabau owner. A nd Raja Nara Singa said, “You and I, 

* an acid fruit H mangosteen f unidentified. 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 




[ 196 — 197 ] 


translated by C. C. Brown 173 

Tun Biajit, will fight for ten tahils, and the owner of the bird 
(I am backing) will put the weight of it in gold as his stake. 
That makesf 711d a catty of gold and people at the ringside will 
put up ten tahils, making thirty tahils as the total stakes/' All 
Tun Bia jit's men then proceeded to wager on Tun Biajit's bird. 

When the birds had been pitted against each other, the 
spurs were put on and Tun Biajit stained the spurs of his cock with 
the blackening oil that gives long life (?) He then said, 
“Stakes, please", and the Menangkabau people put up their stakes, 
some a tahil, some two tahils, some three tahils. When all thirty 
tahils had been put up, Tun Biajit proceeded to divide up the 
gold in parcels, some of two tahils, some of a tahil and some of 
half a tahil. When this was done, he distributed the gold among 
his companions and what was left over he tied up securely into 
a package. The cocks were then released, and no sooner had Raja 
Narasinga's set foot in the ring than it was stabbed in the wattle 
by Tun Bia jit's and lay prostrate. And forthwith the men of 
Ben tan gave a mighty cheer. The men of Menangkabau had 
learnt their lesson and from that day onwardsf 712 refused to cock¬ 
fight again with Tun Biajit! 

After the men of Bentan had stayed some while in Indragiri, 
Raja Singa gave orders for them to be conveyed back to Bentan. 

And the fleet of the Franks that defeated the Bentan fleet 
went up the river to Kampar so that the Franks could present 
themselves before Sultan 'Abdullah. And Sultan 'Abdullah gave 
robes of honour to the Portuguese commander, and he then 
went aboard a foyst of the Franks to see what a foyst was like. 
Forthwith the Franks bound Raja 'Abdullah and the foyst set off 
downstream, to the amazement of the people of Kampar. Sultan 
Abdullah was taken by the Franks to Malaka. And when they 
arrived there, the Portuguese commander stronglyf 713 (bound?) 
Sultan 'Abdullah and sent him to Goa, whence he was taken to 
Portugal. This incident inspired the verse 

To sitf 714 beneath a falling plank 
For chiefs is idiotic: 

To eat of hemp is clearly mad 

When hemp is a narcotic (R.O.W.) 

When Sultan Mahmud Shah heard how Sultan ‘Abdullah 
had been seized by the Franks, he was deeply grieved and he 
sent messengers to Kampar to call Sultan ‘Abdullah s ministers. 
And when they came and presented themselves before Sultan 
Mahmud Shah, he vented his wrath upon them, saying, “Is it true 
that all of you stood by and refused to risk your lives for my son 
f 715 ?“ And all of them bowed their heads in shame, not a man 
daring to look up. And the Bendahara of Kampar, who 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



The Malay Annals. 

the title of Paduka Tuan^ was reduced in rank by the king 
became Sri Amaradiraja. 

God knoweth the truth. 

Chapter XXV 

The Raja of Lingga goes to Bentan to pay his respects and 
is warmly received by Sultan Mahmud. The Raja of Indragiri 
sets off to Bentan to pay his respects and hearing that the Raja 
of Lingga is away seizes this opportunity to pay off an old 
score and ravages Lingga. On arrival at Bentan the Raja 
of Indragiri receives a warm welcome, is married to one of 
Sultan Mahmud's daughters and recognized as ruler of 
Indragiri with the title of Sultan ‘Abdul'l-Jalil. When the 
Raja of Lingga gets back to Lingga and finds what has happened 
during his absence he returns to Bentan to lay his grievances 
before Sultan Mahmud. The latter does his best to heal the 
breach between Lingga and Indragiri, but the Raja of Lingga 
returns to his country and taking advantage of Sultan ‘Abdu’l- 
Jalil’s absence attacks and ravages Indragiri. Fearing reprisals 
from Bentan he seeks the help of the Portuguese and when the 
inevitable attack from Bentan comes, the Portuguese repel it. 
Sultan Mahmud then sends an expedition against the Portuguese 
in Malacca, under the command of the Paduka Tuan with Sultan 
‘Abdul’l-Jalil of Indragiri as ‘observer.* It is unsuccessful and 
the Paduka Tuan is recalled. His quarrel with Sultan ‘Abdu’l- 
Jalil. (Not in Shellabear) 

Here now is a story of Lingga, where the old Maharaja had 
died and had been succeeded by Maharaja Isakf 716 as ruler of 
Lingga. (On his accession to the throne) Maharaja Isak ordered 
ships to be made ready to take him to Bentan to do homage. And 
when the ships were ready he (? setf 717 sail for Bentan and on 
arrival there) went up the river to the city to present himself 
before Sultan Mahmud Shah, who received him with the honour 
and distinction befitting his rank and gave him a placet 718 in the 
hall of audien.ee immediately below the Laksamana. For it was 
the custom that the Maharaja of Lingga should sit below the 
Laksamana: on any journey and whenever a halt was called the 
Maharaja of Lingga had to enhancef 719 the dignity of the Laksa¬ 
mana and the Raja of Tungkal that of the Bendahara. Thus was 
the custom of ancient times and it applied particularly in the case 
of this Laksamana, for he was an elder kinsman of Maharaja 
Isakf 720 . 

Now it happened that Raja Narasinga, the Raja of Indragiri, 
had also made ready to go to Bentan to do homage: but when he 
heard that Lingga was deserted, he made straight for Lingga 
and ravaged it, taking captive the wife and children of Maharaja 
Isak and carrying them off to Indragiri. For there was a 
feudf 721 of long standing between Raja Narasinga and the Raja 
of Lingga. Raja Narasinga then went on to Bentan to present 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


174 

I!97] had 
and 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



17 5 


translated by C. C. Brown 

l 1 97—198] himself before Sultan Mahmud Shah, to find that the Maharaja of 
Lingga had returned to Lingga. Raja Narasinga was a great 
favourite of Sultan Mahmud Shah's. When news came to 
Bentan that Sultan Mansur Shah, the Raja of Pahang, had died 
at the hand of his father, having been caught in the act of 
adultery with his father's wife, Sultan Mahmud Shah sent for his 
daughter, the consort of Sultan Mansur Shah and when she 
arrived gave her in marriage to Raja Narasinga, upon whom Sultan 
Mahmud Shah conferred the title of Sultan ‘Abdu'l-Jalil, at the 
same time according to him the drum of sovereignty. And 
Sultan Mahmud Shall shewed great affection for Sultan ‘Abdu'l- 
Jalil, greater than for any other of his sons-in-law. By Sultan 
Mahmud Shah's daughter Sultan tAbdu'l-Jalil had two sons, (the 
elder) Raja Ahmad and the younger Raja Muhammad whose 
pet name was Raja Pang. 

When Maharaja Isak reached Lingga and found that his 
city had been ravaged and his family taken into captivity, he 
returned forthwith to Bentan with the intention of laying his 
case before Sultan Mahmud Shah. But when on arrival at 
Bentan he found Sultan 'Abdu'l-Jalil installed as son-in-law of 
Sultan Mahmud Shah, he was helpless. Sultan Mahmud Shah 
endeavoured to effect a reconciliation between him and Sultan 
'Abdu'l-Jalil and had his family restored to him: but even so 
Maharaja Isak could see that between him and Sultan ‘Abdu'l- 
alil there was a wide gulf fixed by reason of Sultan ‘Abdu'l-Jalil 
)eingt 721a Sultan Mahmud Shah's son-in-law. He therefore sought 
'eave to return to Lingga. When he was back in Lingga, he 
appeared in public before his ministers with his face smeared 
with charcoal or chalk. When his ministers ventured to point 
out to him that he had charcoal on his face, he forthwith wiped 
his face: and the next time that he appeared in public, the same 
thing happened. After this had happened two or three times, 
one day when Maharaja Isak appeared in public with his face 
smeared with charcoal as before, his ministers said to him, "How 
comes it that we see yourf 722 Highness's countenance besmear¬ 
ed?" And Maharaja Isak answered, "Know you not what it signi¬ 
fies? And when they replied that they knew not, Maharaja Isak 
said, "If I can countf 721b on you to remove f 721c these smears 
from my face, I will tell you why they are here." And his ministers 
said, "How should we not be ready to carry out the task? Even if 
it should cost us our lives, we are with your Highness." Then said 
Maharaja Isak, "Know you not how my wife and my children 
were taken captive by the men of Indragiri? The day has now 
come for me to attack Indragiri! Will you, go with me?" And 
the ministers pledged their word. Maharaja Isak then ordered 
ships to be made ready, and when they were ready, he set forth 
to attack Indragiri and he ravaged the country. The men of 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 




176 


The Malay Annals 

[ 198 — 199 ] Indrag in could offer no effective resistance, for the war-chiefs 
had all gone with Sultan 'Abdu’l-Jalil to Ben tan: and Maharaja 
Isak captured all that was left in Indragiri of Raja Narasinga's 
family and returned to Lingga. 

And when he was come to Lingga, Maharaja Isak took 
counsel with himself, thinking, “I am certain to be attacked by the 
Ruler”, so he sent envoys to Malaka to ask for assistance. And 
the Portuguese sent three galleys, two foysts, eight brigantines 
and twenty carracks. Meanwhile men from Indragiri came to 
Bentan to inform Sultan ‘Abdu’l-Jalil, who thereupon upon went 
to Sultan Mahmud Shah and sought leave to return to Indragiri, 
as the country had been ravaged bv Maharaja Isak. And Sultan 
Mahmud Shah was highly enraged by the news about Indragiri 
and forthwith ordered that a fleet be made ready for an attack 
upon Lingga. He proposed to put the Laksamana in command 
of the expedition, but the Laksamana was unwilling to go and 
sought to be excused on the ground that Maharaja Isak was 
his kinsman. “If”, he said, “Lingga i$ not defeated, people will 
say that it was through trickery on my part. Let me be sent to 
Malaka.” So the Laksamana made ready a fleet of twelve ships 
to go to Malaka and Sang Stia was put in command of tfie 
expedition against Lingga; and the war-chiefs all set out with 
him. When the fleet reached Lingga, they encountered the 
Franks who were assisting Lingga and had anchored in the (?) 
Den dang roads. Sang Stia and his men thereupon engaged 
the Franks and a fierce battle ensued for the entrance to Lingga. 
but they were foiled because the Franks blocked the way. Sang 
Stia’s fleet then charged the fleet of the Franks and many were 
those who were hit by the fire of the Franks, among them Sang 
Jaya Perkerma whose forearm was shot away so that the sinews 
were left dangling. The ships of the Franks were not defeated, nor 
did Lingga fall: and Sang Stia returned to Bentan, where he 
presented himself before Sultan Mahmud Shah and told him all 
that had happened. And the king was enraged. As for Sang Java 
Pekerma, orders were given for a doctor to treat his wound. 
When the doctor plugged the wound, Sang Jaya Pekerma 
groaned: and Sang Guna said to him, “Why all this groaning? 
Aren't you a man?” When he heard what Sang Guna said. 
Sang Jaya Pekerma held his peace and whatever treatment was 
administered to him he said not a word. But after a few days 
he died. 

Meanwhile the Laksamana and Sang Naya had gone to 
Malaka with twelve ships; and on arriving there they anchored 
for three days at the mouth of the river. The Franks made no 
attempt to attack them, for their fleet was away at Lingga and 
only two foysts remained. Now there was a Frank by the name of 
Gonsalo who was about to succeed to the command of the 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



177 


translated by C. C. Brown 

[ 199 — 200 ] Frankish forces: and he said to the commander whom he was 
succeeding, "If you go out with these two foysts, the Malays 
will not attack them.” But the commander of Malaka replied, 
"If I go out with these two foysts, the Laksamana will attack us, 
for he is no ordinary man!” When Gonsalo heard this, he took 
a trayful(?)f 723 of. .. .and ordered it to be taken to the bridge, 
saying, "Whoever is prepared to go with me and drive off the Lak¬ 
samana, let him take this.? for himself!” The Portuguese 

soldiers forthwith mustered! 724 round him, Gonsalo went abroad 
and made ready and the two foysts then put out, with only white 
Franks to row them, there being no Indian sailors. When the 
Laksamana saw the two foysts approaching, he said to Sang Naya, 
"You attack one of the foysts with your six craft and I will attack 
the other with mine.” When they had thus divided up their 
forces, the Laksamana and Sang Naya rowed out, encountered the 
foysts of the Franks at.? and engaged them. The Laksa¬ 

mana made for the foyst of Gonsalo and came alongside it; and so 
fierce was the fighting that in Gonsalo’s foyst many were killed and 
wounded and the Laksamana’s craft was knee-deep in Tlood, while 

from the... .? and the hanging_? blood dripped like rain. Thus 

was it too in the foyst of the Franks. And as they fought they 
drifted from Malaka island right down to Punggor. Meanwhile 
Sang Naya had attacked the other foyst but was hit by the gunfire 
from the Franks and severely wounded. When Sang Naya was hit, 
his ship drifted and the men of the other ships broke off the 
engagement. And the foyst besought Gonsalo to turn his fire on 
to the Laksamana and if he had not given this assistance, the 
Franks might well have been defeated. By this time the com¬ 
batants had drifted apart and the Franks withdrew as far as 
Hujong Pasir where they were held up! 725 and could not gain an 
entrance into the Malaka river, so Franks from the fort came 
and brought! 720 them in- As the result of the day’s fighting the 
Malaka people made this verse 

Gonsalo’s his name, of Malaka the lord, 

What a fool he felt when he kept not his word! 727 ! 

The Lakasamana and Sang Naya then returned to Bentan 
and presented themselves before Sultan Mahmud Shah. And 
the king was displeased! 728 with the Laksamana for refusing to go 
to Lingga, but he rewarded Sang Naya with robes of honour and 
gave him his concubine, Tun Sadah, whom Sang Naya married. 
By her he had two children, a son named Tun Dolah and a 
daughter named Tun Munah who was subsequently married to 
Tun Bilang, son of Tun ‘Abdul who was the son of the old 
Lakasamana, Hang Tuah. By Tun Munah Tun Bilang had a 
son, Tun Merak. 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 







[ 200 — 201 ] 


178 The Malay Annals 

Some while after this Sultan Mahmud Shah gave orders for 
a fleet to be made ready for an attack on Malaka, under the 
leadership of the Paduka Tuan. On this expedition were to go 
Tun Narawangsa, the Laksamana, Sang Stia, Sang Naya, Sang 
Rana,*Sang Sri Stia and all the war-chiefs: and Sultan ‘Abdu'l- 
Jalil, the Raja of Indragiri, was to accompany them as observerf 729 . 
When the fleet was ready, the Paduka Tuan and Sultan ‘Abdu'l- 
Jalil set forth together with all the war-chiefs: only the ministers 
of state remained at Ben tan. And when the expedition reached 
Sawang waters they fell in with a Brunai(?) ship bound for 
Malaka. The Paduka Tuan hailed the master of this ship and 
he came to present himself before the Paduka Tuan. Mean¬ 
while Sang Stia whose ship was nearestf 730 ? went with Tun Krah, 
Tun Menawar and Tun Dolah to the Brunai ship, and Sang Stia 
and the young men with him boarded the ship and pro¬ 
ceeded to loot it. When the master of the Brunai ship saw 
that his ship was being looted, he took leave of the Paduka Tuan 
and returned to his ship. When Sang Stia saw him coming he 
left the ship and embarked in his own boat, but the master of 
the Brunai ship attacked those still there and they jumped over¬ 
board. He then set sail for home, but the Malay ships that 

.? had taken manyf 731 captives. The Laksamana said 

therefore to the Paduka Tuan, "I think it would be as well if, sir, 
you ordered an investigation to be made of those who have taken 
captives, in case the Ruler should inquire/' The Paduka agreed 
and bade the Laksamana go and investigate. “Very well, I will 
go and do so,” said the Laksamana: and he proceeded with his 
investigation. From those who had taken captives, the Laksa¬ 
mana took one from whoever had two and two from whoever 
had four. But when he came to Tun Krah's ship, he found 
Tun Krah regaling his crew with food and drink. The crew had 
gathered in the fore part of the ship, which was accordingly 
down by the bows. When the Laksamana saw that the ship 
was down by the bows, he assumedf 732 that Tun Krah had no 
captives, so he passed on to the ship of Tun Dolah. Tun 
Dolah had two captives, one fair and the other dark; and the 
Laksamana said to him, “Choose the one you want, Tun Dolah.” 
And Tun Dolah said, “When I have but two, are you going to 
take one from me? If you are, take the lot!” And the Laksa¬ 
mana replied, “No, Tun Dolah, you had better choose one.” And 
Tun Dolah said “No, I won't! You can take them all!” Then 
answered the Laksamana, “Very well then, Tun Dolah, if you 
don't want any, put them off your ship.” But when the Lak¬ 
samana was on the point of taking both girls off the ship, Tun 
Dolah said, “Leave the dark one!” And the Laksamana smiled 
and left the dark girl with Tun Dolah. He then went on to the 
ship of Sang Stia, but Sang Stia gathered! 733 all his craft around 
him and said, “If you try and inquire here, I'll fight you! Never 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 




translated by C. C. Brown 


179 


[201—202] were the doings of one war-chief inquired into byf 7 ^ 4 anotherf If 
you are a great war-chief, Laksamana, so am If And the Lak- 
samana answered, "I have been sent by the Paduka Tuan, brother, 
to make inquiry, I am not here to quarrel with you. If you agree 
to the inquiry, I will make it. If not, I will go back and inform 
the Chief/' And the Laksamana returned to the Paduka Tuan 
and told him what Sang Stia had said. The Paduka Tuan then 
ordered a boy of his to go and question Sang Stia. And when he 
arrived, Sang Stia said, "For the Paduka Tuan's page boy to 
question me is but right and properf 735 . But the Laksamana— 
no! For he is a war-chief and so am I!" 

After that the Paduka Tuan set forth from Sawang and after 
a voyage of some days reached Malaka and stayed at Pulau Sabat, 
where Sultan ‘Abdu'l-Jalil, the Paduka Tuan and the rest of 
the party went ashore for pleasure. That evening the Indragiri 
men brought the royal drum and were about to sound it when 
Sultan ‘Abdu'l-Jalil forbade them, saying, "Don't beat the drum 
yet, the Paduka Tuan is stillf 735 here." But the Paduka Tuan 
replied, "Beat on, for we go to meet the enemyf 736 !" "Very well, if 
you say so," said Sultan ‘Abdu'l-Jalil, and forthwith the first 
notesf 737 on the royal drum were sounded. Thereupon the Paduka 
Tuan went back to his ship. Then said Sultan ‘Abdu'l-Jalil, "I 
have been insulted by the Paduka Tuan. I realised that he could 
not very well be present when the royal drum was being beaten 
in my honour, and that is why I said it was not to be beaten. 
Why then after telling us to beat the drum did he forthwith 
return to his ship? Was it not because he wished to insult me?" 
When the Paduka Tuan came to hear what Sultan ‘Abdu'l-Jalil 
had said, he observed, "Is it likely that I could with propriety 
attend the beating of the drum for the Raja of Indragiri?" When 
Sultan ‘Abdu'l-Jalil came to hear what the Paduka Tuan had 
said, his comment was, "Of course the Paduka Tuan could not 
assist at a ceremony in my honour. That was why I said the 
drum was not to be beaten. Why then did he tell us to beat it?" 

The expedition then went on to Malaka, where it was agreed 
that an attack should be delivered on Thursday night, Sang Stia 
to attack from the seaward and the Paduka Tuan, the Laksamana 
and the war-chiefs from Ayer Leleh. But that night there was 
a very great storm with heavy rain and it was not possible to 
attack from the landward side. Sang Stia did however attack that 
night and sank one ship. On the following night the Paduka 
Tuan made ready to attack. It happened that Bidam Stia, Sultan 
Mahmud's riding elephant, had been left behind at Muar. The 
Paduka Tuan sent for this elephant and mounted it for the attack 
on Malaka, with the elephant headman! 738 (who bore the title 
of Maharaja Kunjara) on the elephant's head and Tun Mahmud, 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



180 


The Malay Annals 

[ 202 — 203 ] the Paduka Tuan's son, balancing his father on the packsaddle. 

[This Tun Mahmud was known as Datok Legur] By the side 
of the elephant marched the Laksamana and the war-chiefs. And 
the Franks opened fire from the fort, the cannon balls falling 
like rain, and man after man was killed, until no one would carry 
the lanternsf 739 any longer. Presently however two young men 
of the Paduka Tuan's, Hang Hasan and Hang Husain, volunteered 
to carry them. And such was the terror inspired by the gunfire 
that those who marched refused to go far from the side of the 
Paduka Tuan’s elephant. But they said, “We'd better be on 
our guard with this Bidam Stia, he's full of vice, or we shall find 
we've saved our skin's from the cannon balls only to be killed by 
an elephantf 740 !" But Maharaja replied, “Have no fear, gentle¬ 
men! Let Bidam Stia but wrigglef 741 his trunk and get out of 
line and he'll get a kick from me!" 

When they were close to the fort of Malaka the Paduka 
Tuan drove his elephant, Bidam Stia, at the fort and the 
elephant's right tusk was broken. Meanwhile many were killed 
or wounded by the gunfire of the Franks from the fort and when 
day dawned the Malays retreated to the hill. Sultan 'AbduTJalil 
then sent a letter to Bentan giving a full account of the battle, 
highly commending Sang Stia but disparaging the Paduka Tuan. 
When the letter reached Bentan, Sultan Mahmud Shah was 
exceedingly angry and commanded Tun Bijaya Sura to bring the 
Paduka Tuan back. And he gave him two letters, one to Sang 
Stia which was worded thus, “Greeting and prayers to God from 
the elder brother to the younger brother Sang Stia", and one to 
the Paduka Tuan which did not even mention his name but 
merely ran as follows:—“If a man says his valour is greater than 
that of Hamzah and ‘Ali, and if he says his knowledge is greater 
than that of Imam Ghazali, and it is not so then is he a greater 
liar than Saiyid ahHakf 742 !" Tun Bijaya Sura then set out for 
Malaka and on arriving there he conveyed the royal command to 
the Paduka Tuan, handing the letter to him before all those 
present. When the Paduka Tuan heard what was in the letter, 
he realised that it was to himself that the letter applied: and he 
and Sultan 'Abdu'l-Jalil and the war-chiefs ail rerurned to 
Bentan, taking the elephant Bidam Stia with them. 

After a voyage of some days they reached Bentan and went 
to the palace to present themselves: and they found that Sultan 
Mahmud Shah was giving an audience. Raja ‘Abdu'l-Jalil, the 
Paduka Tuan and the war-chiefs then did obeisance and took 
their seats at their appointed places in the hall. When Sultan 
Mahmud Shah asked Sultan ‘Abdu'l-Jalil how the fighting had 
gone, Sultan ‘AbduTJalil gave him a full account of it and said, 
'If only the Paduka Tuan had been willing to attack on that 
Thursday night when Sang Stia delivered his attack, I fancy 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



181 


translated by C. C. Brown 

[ 203 — 204 ] it would have gone hard with Malaka.'' When Sultan 
Mahmud Shah heard the words of Sultan 'Abdu'l-Jalil he was very 
angry with the Paduka Tuan. And the Paduka Tuan knelt and 
did obeisance to Sultan Mahmud Shah. Then he turned and 
confronted Sultan 'Abdu'l-Jalil, and said, "Now then, Sultan 
'Abdu'l-Jalil, here am I come to present myself before the Raja 
and you tell him what is not true. Even if I did agree to attack 
on that Thursday night, there was a great storm that night and 
what was I, an old man, to do? So far from being able to fight, 
it was all I could do to pull my blanket over me! But on that 
Friday night did you not see how Bidam Stia broke a tusk when 
I drove him at Malaka fort? You thinkj 743 that because you are 
the Ruler's favourite son-in-law, you can say anything you please. 
For you I have no fear, however much you may curse me (?) f 744 ! 
The only man I fear is the Ruler, he is my liege lord. The ideaf 744a 
of the Raja of Indragiri also being my master! If you want to 
fight, I am ready!" When Sultan 'Abdu’l-Jalil heard the words 
of the Paduka Tuan he bowed his head in shame, and Sultan 
Mahmud said not a word. After a long audience Sultan Mahmud 
Shah retired and all those present returned, each to his housef 745 . 

God knoweth the truth. To Him do we return. 

Chapter XXVI 


Raja ‘Abdul of Siak visits Bentan, is recognized by Sultan 
Mahmud as ruler of Siak with the title of Sultan Khoja Ahmad 
Shah and married to one of Sultan Mahmud’s daughters. 
Sultan Mahmud sends the Paduka Tuan to the Western territo¬ 
ries to call their governor. Tun Aria Bija ‘diraja, who had not 
paid his respects to Sultan Mahmud since the fall of Malacca. 

(Not in Shellabear) 

Here now is a story of Siak, where on the death of the Raja, 
Sultanf 746 Ibrahim, the throne had passed to Raja 'Abdul, his son 
by a daughter of the Raja of Malaka. After his accession Raja 
'Abdul had ships made ready to take him to Bentan to do homage 
to Sultan Mahmud Shah. And when they were ready, Raja 
'Abdul set out. And when after a voyage of some days he 
reached Bentan, he went to the palace and presented himself 
before Sultan Mahmud Shah, who was well pleased to see him 
and had him installed as Raja by beat of drum, bestowing upon 
him the title of Sultan Khoja Ahmad Shah. Sultan Mahmud 
Shah then took him as son-in-law, and by Sultan Mahmud's 
daughter Sultan Khoja Ahmad Shah had two sons, Jamal and Raja 
Biajit. Now Sultan Khoja Ahmad had a brother, named Raja 
Sema'un, and he married a daughter of Raja Kinta (?) at Muar: 
by her he had three daughters and two sons, Raja Isak and Raja 
Kudrat. 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society . 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



182 


The Malay Annals 

1204 — 205 ] Now it happened one night that Sultan Mahmud Shah was 

speaking! 74Ga of the vassal states towards the West, viz. Bruas and 
Manj-ong, and was saying how long it was since he had had a 
visit from their rulers (?)., and how even Tun Aria Bija ‘diraja 
had not presented himself before the king sincef 747 the fall of 
Malaka. That same night he sent for the Bendahara and said to 
him, “What think you should be done? The western terri¬ 
tories are slipping from our hands!" And the Bendahara 
answered, “I suggest, your Highness, that the Paduka Tuan be 
sent to the West to summon Tun Aria Bija ‘diraja hither, for the 
Paduka Tuan is hisf 748 brother-in-law." And Sultan Mahmud Shah 
said, “I agree. Inform the Paduka Tuan." And the Bendahara 
replied that he would do so, and he then left the palace and went 
home. Having sent for the Paduka Tuan he conveyed to him 
the commands of Sultan Mahmud Shah, and the Paduka Tuan 
undertook to go. On the following day, when Sultan Mahmud 
Shah gave an audience to princes, ministers,! 748a knights and war- 
chiefs, the Bendahara and the Paduka Tuan presented themselves 
before him and took their customary places in the hall. The 
Bendahara then said to Sultan Mahmud Shah, “Your Highness, 
I have conveyed to the Paduka Tuan what your Highness was 
pleased to say last night, and he has undertaken to go." And Sultan 
Mahmud Shah was well pleased to hear this and said, “Very well, 
if the Paduka Tuan is willing to go, we will appoint him accord¬ 
ingly." Then said the Paduka Tuan, “Very well, your Highness. 
I am your servant. Whatever your Highness may appoint me to 
do, is it conceivable that I should disobey? But if he whom I 
am sent to fetch will not come willingly, I shall bring him before 
your Highness by force!" The Paduka Tuan then had twenty 
ships made ready. 

And when the ships were ready, the Padjjka Tuan set out; 
and he took with him his wife and his son, Tun Mahmud (Shah), 
who was known as Datok Legur. The Paduka Tuan's wife, Tun 
Sebat, was a sister of Tun Aria Bija ‘diraja. When in due course 
the Paduka Tuan reached the Western territory, Tun Aria Bija 
‘diraja came out to welcome him. And when they met, they 
embraced each other. And the Paduka Tuan said, “I have brought 
your sister." To which Tun Aria Bija ‘diraja replied, “Oh, my 
sister has come, has she?" Tun Aria Bija ‘diraja then took them 
to his house: and he asked on what business the Paduka Tuan 
was come. And the Paduka Tuan answered, “I am come here 
with orders to summon you to appear before the Ruler, sir." 
And Tun Aria Bija ‘diraja said, “Even if I had not been summoned 
to appear, I was resolved to go and present myself, for whom else 
(but the Raja) do I regard as my master? To no one but Sultan 
Mahmud Shah do I pay homage! But I shall not go forthwith in 
response to this summons of yours. Even had you come with 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



translated by C. C. Brown 


185 


[205—206] but one ship, it would have been called an 'expedition 7 (sent to 
fetch me): and if I go now to present myself, people will say that 
it is not of my own volition (?) that I am going but because you 
forced me to go! And the Paduka Tuan said, "I understand. 
(Meanwhile now that I am here) let us marry your daughter, Tun 
Mah, with this boy of mine, Mahmud.” And Tun Aria Bija 'diraja 
agreed. 

When the propitious day arrived, the marriage of Tun 
Mahmud and Tun Mah was celebrated. The Paduka Tuan then 
returned to Ben tan, leaving Tun Mahmud with Tun Aria Bija 
'diraja and giving him Selangor as his fief. 

One arriving at Bentan the Paduka Tyan went to the palace 
and presented himself before Sultan Mahmud Shah, to whom 
he related what Tun Aria Bija 'diraja had said. Sultan Mahmud 
Shah was well pleased to hear it. After the Paduka Tuan had 
left the Western territory, Tun Bija 'diraja ordered a fleet of 
thirty sail to be made ready to take him to Bentan: and when 
the fleet was ready, he set out. When he reached Bentan, he 
went to the palace and presented himself before Sultan Mahmud 
Shah, who was well pleased to receive this visit from the Raja 
of the Western territory and bestowed upon him robes of 
honour complete with all accessories. At the same time he 
gave him the drum of sovereignty and ordered that he be installed 
by beat of drum as ruler in the Western territory. Tun Aria 
Bija 'diraja for his part undertook to bring the men of Manjong. 
and the men of the outlying districts of the Western territory 
for an attack upon Malaka. Sultan Mahmud Shah then bade 
Tun Aria Bija 'diraja return to the Western Territory: and draw¬ 
ing the ring from his finger he gave it to Tun Aria Bija 'diraja, 
saying, "You, Tun Aria Bija 'diraja, are like this ringf 748b of ours,, 
we cast itf 748c into the sea in the hope that if fortune favours 
us it may float!” Tun Aria Bija 'diraja then did homage and 
was given robes of honour as befitted his rank. Thereupon he set 
out on his return journey: and when in due course he reached the 
Western territory, his drum of sovereignty was beaten and all the 
war-chiefs were present at the ceremony. When it was concluded, 
all those present did obeisance to Tun Aria Bija diraja, but he 
himself turning towards Bentan did obeisance, saying, "Your 
Majesty, Sultan Mahmud Shah!” Tun Aria Bija 'diraja had three 
sons: one was given the title of Raja Lela, the second that of 
Tun Rana and the third was called Tun Sayid. [After thatf 749 
Sultan 'AbduTJalil sought leave of Sultan Mahmud Shah to return 
to Indragiri, where he arrived in due course] 

God knoweth the truth. 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



[ 206 — 207 ] 


184 The Malay Annals 

Chapter XXVII 

The story of Sultan Husain, Raja of Haru, and his journey 
to Bentan to seek the hand of Raja Puteh, Sultan Mahmud's 
beautiful daughter. His adventures at Bentan. He marries 
Raja Puteh and returns to Haru vastly impressed with the pomp 
and dignity of the court of Sultan Mahmud in exile. 

. (Not in Shellabear) 

Here now is a story of the Raja of Haru, whose name 
was Sultan Husainf 750 . He was a remarkably handsome, well- 
built man; and such was his strength and valour that he would 
declare, 'Tut me on my elephant Desening, with Tambang 
behind me and Pikang marching at the elephant's side, then if I 
fought f 750 Java, the whole of Java (would be no match for me): 
if I fought China, the whole of China (would be no match for 
me): if I fought the Franks on the mainland, (they would be no 
match for me)!" When Sultan Husain came to hear of the beauty 
of Rajaf 751 Puteh, he conceived a great desire for her: and on 
the strength of the reports he had received of her beauty and 
of the great affection Sultan Mahmud Shah had for her, he 
proposed to go to Bentan and seek her hand. But his mother 
was opposed to this design and said, "Go not, Sultan, to Hujong 
f 7r,la Tanah, for (? the Raja) is ourf 752 enemy." But Sultan Husain 
replied, "Even if I risk death at his hands, I am determined to 
go and present myself before the great Raja at Hujong Tanah!": 
and despite his mother's efforts to dissuade him he insisted on 
going. 

Sultan Husain then set out for Bentan with two shipsf 753 , one 
for himself and one for his retinue, and after a voyage of some 
days they came to Layam, where Sultan Mahmud Shah ordered 
that he be welcomed by the Bendahara and the ministers of 
state. The Bendahara was told to take the Sultan Mudaf 754 
with him on his lap. He set forth accordingly, with a dozen 
or more ships, and met the Haru party at Tekuni (?). When 
Sultan Husain's ship was alongside the ship carrying the Sultan 
Muda, Sultan Husain hastened forth from under the awning of 
his ship and stood out on the deck, and the Bendahara appeared 
on the deck in his ship with the Sultan Muda. Sultan Husain 
then said, "Let me come aboard your ship." And when the 
Bendahara suggested that the Sultan Muda should go aboard 
Sultan Husain's ship, Sultan Husain replied, "What I should 
like is to be paddledf 755 by your Sakai!" Then said the Benda¬ 
hara, "In that case, your Highness, please come on board this 
ship." Sultan Husain accordingly went aboard the Bendahara's 
ship and took the Sultan Muda on his lap. The crew then 
plied their paddles and Sultan Husain's ship was soon left far 
behind. 


Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



185 


translated by C. C. Brown 

[ 207 — 208 ] When they reached the outer fort the Bendahara ordered 

his crew to stop paddling. And when Sultan Husain asked what 
they were being stopped for, the Bendahara said, "Your Highness's 
ship is still far behind!" And Sultan Husain answered, "Why, 
Bendahara, such was my desire to see our great Raja that I set 
out from Haru with but twof 756 ships. Am I to waste time now 
waiting for my ship? Paddle on, please, that we may tarry not 
in presenting ourselves before the Raja!" So the crew paddled 
on: and when they reached Jambu Ayer, Sultan Mahmud Shah 
himself came out on his elephant to meet Sultan Husain, who 
did obeisance to him. Sultan Mahmud Shah then embraced 
Sultan Husain and put him on his elephant, seating him on the 
other side of the packsaddle with the Sultan Muaa on his lap. 
Thus they proceeded to the palace. 

And when they were come into the palace, they took their 
seats in the hall of audience, and Sultan Mahmud Shah made 
Sultan Husain sit beside him. Food was then brought and Sultan 
Mahmud Shah ate with Sultan Husain. Now Sultan Husain had 
a herald called Sri Indra. He stood beside Sultan Husain, and 
when cock-fighting began on the lawn outside the hall and the 
shouts of the onlookers reached the hall, such was Sultan Husain's 
passion for cock-fighting that he turnedf 7r>7a his back on Sultan 
Mahmud Shah and stretching out f 757b his hand he said (to Sri 
Indra), "Put this on for me!" But Sri Indra pulled him by the 
thigh,f 758 saying, "The Raja, your Highness!" Sultan Hussain forth¬ 
with faced Sultan Mahmud Shah again and did homage. Thus did 
he behave. [Sultan Husain had a war-chief called Din: and it was 
his habit when he had been drinking and was the worse for liquor, 
to sing the praises of his war-chiefs, saying} "Din is a brave man as 
was his father before him. Where do you find a brave son of a 
lily-livered father?" He praised all and sundry but especiallyf 759 
Din] And people told Sultan Husain that Sultan Mahmud Shah 
would not acceptf 700 him (? as a suitor for the hand of Raja 
Puteh.) When he heard this, Sultan Husain said, "If I am not 
accepted, IT1 make war on this land of Bentan!" So saying he 
ripped off f 762 the sleeve of his jacket and so violently did he tug it 
that came away with a sharp rending sound. Then he stuffed the 
sleeve with gravel and whirled it so fiercely round that it rattled 
and crackled! 

We are told that while he was at Bentan, seven times a day 
did Sultan Husain change his jacket and the sheathf 701a of 
his creese! Subsequently Sultan Mahmud Shah accepted him 
(as suitor for the hand of Raja Puteh) to the joy of Sultan 
Husain, whose war-chiefs came continuously from Haru to join 
him: every day brought a ship or two ships. And they all 
gathered together, in number a hundred. Sultan Mahmud 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



186 


The Malay Annals 

[208 209 ] Shah then began the festivities for the wedding of Sultan Husain 

and Raja Puteh,and they went on for three months, day and 
night. At the end of the three months Sultan Husain was 
married to Raja Puteh: but no sooner had the marriage taken 
place than Raja Puteh conceived a dislike for Sultan Husain 
and fled back to her father. Sultan Mahmud Shall then 
bestowed another of his daughters upon Sultan Husain, but he 
would have none of her and said, 'This girl is my sister and I 
want her not. It is my wife that I want and none other/' The 
Bendahara then said to Sultan Mahmud Shah, "Why does your 
Highness indulge your daughter in her refusal to return to Sultan 
Husain? Why, even if your Highness was only an officerf 762 
of state, how bad it would sound!" And Sultan Mahmud Shah 
agreed and gave orders that Raja Puteh be coaxed into returning 
to Sultan Husain. After that Raja Puteh did return to Sultan 
Husain, who was overjoyed, and they became deeply enamoured 
of each other. Ere long Sultan Husain began to think of return¬ 
ing to Haru, "for", said he," there are three things that make life 
here in Bentan impossible for me ! The first is Hang Embong's 
trick of whispering: the second is Tun Rana's tricks of saying 'by 
your leave': and the thirdf 764 is Tun Bija Sura's latah*." As re¬ 
gards Hang Embong's "whisper"—whatever he said, whether good 
or ill, was said in a whisper, which made people suspicious, as 
whispering always suggests secrecy. As for Tun Rana's "by your 
leave"—it was Tun Rana's habit, even when people were sitting 
so close together that their thighs were touching, to make his way 
past, with a 'by your leave', and step over them. As for Tun Bija 
Sura's Iatahf 7G4a — if he had a fit of latah and no one took any 
notice of him, he would pluck (?) at people's sarongs to get him¬ 
self noticed and would go on plucking until he tore them. It 
was by reason of these three people that Sultan Husain found life 
in Bentan impossible, and he sought leave of Sultan Mahmud 
Shah to return to Haru. Sultan Mahmud Shah agreed and Sultan 
Husain had ships made ready accordingly. 

When they were ready, Sultan Husain together with Raja 
Puteh, his wife, did homage to Sultan Mahmud Shah, who 
embraced them both. And there was the sound of lamenting in the 
palace as of mourning for the dead. And Sultan Mahmud Shah 
bestowed upon Raja Puteh jewellery and regalia beyond counting, 
together with a bahara of gold: he gave to her everything that 
he used or wore, so that there remained for the Sultan Muda 

nothing but a bowl of gold alloy.and the bedragoned 

sword of kingship. , And the Bendahara said to Sultan Mahmud 
Shah, "Your Highness's son, the Sultan Muda, will be Raja one 
day, but your Highness has given everything to your Highness's 
daughter who goes to Haru, and there is nothing left for the 

* paroxysmal neurosis 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 





187 


translated by C. C. Brown 

[ 209 — 210 ] Sultan Muda!” But Sultan Mahmud Shah answered, '‘If the 
Sultan Muda has but the sword of kingship, he will have gold as 
well.” That is to say, where there is sovereignty, there is gold. 

For his royal daughter in her home in Haru he provided 
a company of young nobles, forty men and forty women. Some 
of them went leaving! 705 wives behind; some of them went leaving 
fathers behind; some of them went as fathers leaving children 
behind. Sultan Husain then moved off downstream and Sultan 
Mahmud Shah accompanied his daughter as far as Dada Ayer, 
nor did he leave his vessel and return to the palace until the 
ship of Sultan Husain had sailed out of sight. After a voyage 
of some days Sultan Husain arrived at Haru where he dis¬ 
embarked and went with f 706 his consort to see his mother, who 
embraced them both, in her joy that the parting was over. And 
she asked her son, "What did you see that impressed you, 
Sultan?” And Sultan Husain replied, "I saw many things that 
impressed me, but two stood out above all others.” "And what 
were they?”, asked the queen-mother. "In the first place”, 
answered Sultan Husain, "if the Raja gave a banquet at which 
twenty or thirty dishfuls of food were served, with sixteen or 
seventeen men serving! 707 them, was there any noise? Not a 
floorboard creaked and lo! and behold, there were the dishes! 
And dishes! 768 mind you, that were four times the size of ours! 
Another thing—every plate, bowl and tray was of silver, gold or 
gold alloy!” And the mother of Sultan Husain listened with 
amazement to her son’s description. 

God knoweth the truth. 

Chapter XXVIII 

The visit of the Sultan of Pahang and other Rajas to Bentan. 
Sultan Mahmud marries his daughter Raja Hatijah to the Sultan 
of Pahang and appoints him to be ruler of Pahang. The Portu¬ 
guese attack Bentan, the Malays are defeated and Sultan Mahmud 
has to take to the jungle. Tun Mahmud gets him away to 
Kampar where after reigning for five years he dies and is succed- 
ed by Raja Ala’u’d-din, his son by Tun Fatimah. Raja Muzaffar* 
his brother (see end of chapter XVIII) is driven out and flees to 
Kang (?K!ang), whence he is taken to Perak by a trader and 
proclaimed ruler with the title of Sultan Muzaffar Shah. Tun 
Mahmud, who had been made Sri Agar Raja for his services 
in getting Sultan Mahmud away to Kampar, is made Bendahara 
of Perak. (Passages on pp. 210, 212, 213 and 215 will be found 
with considerable variations in chapter XXXIV of Shellabear) 

Here now is a story of how the Sultan of Pahangt™ 9 (? 
with other Rajas) came to present himself before Sultan 
Mahmucl Shah. And Sultan Mahmud Shah took him as his 
son-in-law, marrying him with his daughter Raja Hatijah, and 
had him at the same time proclaimed as Ruler to the beat of 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



1210 — 211 ] 


188 


The Malay Annals 


the drum of sovereignty. After they had stayed awhile at Bentan, 
the Rajas took their leave of Sultan Mahmud Shah and returned, 
each to his country. 


And word was brought to Sultan Mahmud Shah "an expe¬ 
dition from Goa is now at Malaka, consisting of thirty carracks, 
four galeasses, five long galleys, eight foysts and two brigantines 
and they are coming to attack us here.” Sultan Mahmud Shah 
thereupon commanded the Bendahara to put the forts in order 
and assemble the forces: and he commanded the Sri Awadana, 
as Temenggong, to call out men to strengthen the outer fort. A 
list was to be madef 770 of the duties to be performed by the slaves. 
The Sri Awadanaf 771 made a list for himself, which ran as 
follows:— Slaves of the Sri Awadana—(1) Tandaf 772 , to perform 
executions and carry the lance (2) Selamat, to steer and carry the 
betel-casef 773 (3) Tua, to paddle and carry the sword (4) Teki (?), 
to accompany me and carry the water-bottlef 774 .” This list he 
submitted to Sultan Mahmud Shah, who when he saw how it was 
worded was very angry and said, “If it should come to the turn of 
the bn Awadana to be Bendahara, mayf 774a God take our life!” 


When the work on the outer fort was completed. Sang Stia 
volunteered for the defence of it, saying to Sultan Mahmud Shah, 

the fort is taken! Let the Fr anks come, what 
k a f t . ter ‘ * hese two cannon we will send their ships to the 

bottom! Of the two cannon, which carried balls the size of 
oranges, one was called Dragon of the Waves and the other The 
Swimming Frog: to such were they likened. When the Franks 
were nearing Bentan, Sultan Mahmud Shah commanded Pateh 
Suradana *o reconnoitre. He found the Franks at Layam, where¬ 
upon he paddled back with all speed. When asked what he had 

to report, he replied, “Their canacks are at Lubok, their 
grabs f' 7il —i-:i- — j .i--- i - 

where!” 


V t W-I , , ’-‘““WKS are at laiDOK, their 

at 1 engkiiu and their sloops are here, there and every- 


When he reached Kopak, he told the Ruler of all that he had 
seen: and the Ruler forthwith commissioned! 77,5 the Paduka Tuan 
saying, “The Franks are at Kuala Tebing Tinggi ” The Sri Nara 
‘diraja then went aboard the Paduka Tuan’s ship to confer with 
him. At that moment the Franks came up the river, in four 
galleys, and surrounded the ship of the Paduka Tuan, two of them 
on either side: and the rest of Frankish fleet followed, ship 
after ship. And the Paduka Tuan was asked what should be 
done, “for the Franks are approaching and in great strength.” 
And the Paduka Tuan reflected, saying to himself, “If I attack 
now that I have the Sri Nara ‘diraja on board, he is bound to get 
the credit, being such a favourite of the Ruler’s!” So he called 
Hang Aji Maras who was in charge of the crew, and whispered 
something in his ear, whereupon Hang Aji Maras went to the bows 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



189 


translated by C. C. Brown 

[211—21?] of the ship. The Sri Nara 'diraja now said to the Paduka Tuan, 
"Come, chief, let us attack the Franks!” The Paduka Tuan 
pretended to agree, but from the bows Hang Aji Maras called out, 
"We're agroundf 770 (?) !” To which the Paduka Tuan replied, 
"Shift back then!” Hang Aji Maras accordingly ordered his men 
to row upstream, and upstream they all went. The Franks 
advanced to the attack, but by now the tide had begun to ebb, 
so they tied up their galleys to the outer fort. As soon as the 
tide began to flow, they pulledf 777 up the mooring stakes; and 
though their ships were hit by the fire from the land, they took 
no notice of it and attacked the fort of Sang Stia. 

Then ensued a fierce battle, in which the number of those 
killed or wounded was very large: and Sang Stia appealed for 
help from the other side of the river, so persistently that Sultan 
Mahmud Shah commanded Tun Narawangsa to go to his assis¬ 
tance. Tun Narawangsa did obeisance and then set out; but the 
Paduka Tuan, perceiving that all who crossed over to Sang Stia’s 
side of the river were either killed or had to swim back naked, 
said to Sultan Mahmud Shah, "Your Highness, I pray that my 
son-in-law may be excused this duty, for the enemy is formidable 
and if my son-in-law is lost, I shall be left with no one on whom 
to rely.” Sultan Mahmud Shah accordingly recalled Tun Nara¬ 
wangsa, and Tun Narawangsa came back. 

And the fighting waxed ever more fierce: Sang Stia was 
killed, the Laksamana was wounded and the men of Bentan broke 
and fled. But Sultan Mahmud Shah refused to leave the palace: 
his intention was "if the Franks come, I will fight them here.” 
The Sri Nara 'diraja urged him to leave Bentan now that the city 
had fallen. But he replied, "When I came here, Sri Nara 'diraja, 

I knew full well that Bentan was an island; and it was because 
I was determined that there should be no retreating that I took up 
my abode here! If I had thought of retreating, I should have done 
better to stay on the mainland. (But I did not do that,) for 
it is the custom of Rajas that when their country falls to the 
foe, they die.” And the Sri Nara 'diraja said, "Your Highness 
is mistaken! 778 . Every country has a Raja, and if your Highness 
is granted length of days, we can find ten countries for you! 
But Sultan Mahmud Shah answered, "Say no more, Sri Nara 
'diraja. Retreat from here I do not!” Thereupon the Sri Nara 
'diraja seized the hand of Sultan Mahmud Shah and dragged 
him away from the palace. And Sultan Mahmud Shah cried, 
"Behold,! 779 ,the Sri Nara 'diraja makes me a runaway!” "Yes, 
your Highness,” answered the Sri Nara 'diraja, "and I have no 
compunctionf 779a in doing so!” Then said Sultan Mahmud 
Shah, “But what of all the valuables and gold I am leaving 
behind? How shall I fare without them?” And the Sri Nara 
'diraja replied, “Leave it to me, your Highness, to get them 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



190 


The Malay Annals 

C 212—213] away:" and turning to the Bendahara he said, "(? Come, let us) 
save the Ruler's possessions in the palace!" And the Bendahara 
agreed and forthwith he stopped the fugitives and ordered them 
to rescue the valuables and gold, assigning to each what he was 
to carry. And all the property was go away: not a thing was 
left behind. 

The Franks then entered the city and began to loot it, while 
the populace scattered in all directions. Meanwhile Sultan 
Mahmud Shah was making his way through the forest. He was 
accompanied by many womenfolk, but the only man with him 
was the Sri Nara 'diraja who would not leave his side. And when 
they came to a certain place, they fell in with Tun Nara 
wangsa and his men searching for his wife. When the Sri Nara 
■diraja saw him, he said, "So there you are, Mahmudf 780 ! Where 
are you going?" and Tun Narawangsa answered, "I am going to 
find my wife." Then said the Sri Nara 'diraja, "Come with me, 
for the Ruler is here," And Tun Narawangsa answered, "The 
Ruler we have with us; well and good. But if my wife falls into 
the hands of the Franks, is that good?" "You talk like that", 
replied the Sri Nara 'diraja, "because it is the custom of us Malays 
to want children and wives. But can they ever rank with 
our masters? The more so in this case because who was it that 
put our father to death? Was it not this Raja here? Now is our 
chance to return good for evil! Moreover am I not your brother? 
Have you the heart to abandon me?" When he heard these words 
Tun Nara Wangsa came back and accompanied Sultan Mahmud 
Shah through the forest, slipping and slithering as he was and 
making no progress because he had not the strength!' 81 . It was 
not until they had put cloth round round the soles of his feet that 
he was able to advance. Presently Sultan Mahmud Shah said 
to the Sri Nara 'diraja, "I have had no food since the morning." 
When the Sri Nara 'diraja heard these words, he bade Tun Nara¬ 
wangsa go and seek rice for the Ruler to eat. Tun Narawangsa 
set off and ere long he met a woman carrying cooked rice in a 
basket. "Give me a little rice, lady", said Tun Narawangsa, 
and when the woman bade him take some, he topk several 
b'alek adap* leaves and put rice on them. These he bore forth¬ 
with to Sultan Mahmud Shah, who ate the rice. 

And when he had eaten, Sultan Mahmud Shah said, "What 
think you should be done, Sri Nara 'diraja? I haven't a penny f 782 
And the Sri Nara 'diraja bade Tun Nara Wangsa go and obtain 
some money for the Ruler. Tun Narawangsa set out according¬ 
ly and presently he saw a man carrying a cofferf 783 (?) of two 
catties' weight. He snatched! 784 it out of the marl's hands 

*Mussanda sp. 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 




translated by C. C. Brown 


191 


[ 213 — 214 ] and ran away with it. The man cried out "Here's Tun Nara- 
wangsa committing highway robbery; 7 ', but Tun Narawangsa took 
no notice, put a cloth over the coffer and took it to Sultan 
Mahmud Shah who said, "It's not much but it will do!" They 
then went on their way until they reached Dempok (?). The 
Bendahara was following Sultan Mahmud Shah, while the Paduka 
Tuan with his family went behind Bentan and thence to Sayong. 
And the Paduka Tuan said to his son, Tun Pekerma, "Go and 
collect all the people living on the coast, and we will then go and 
fetchf 785 the Ruler." Tun Pekerma went accordingly and called 
the coast tribesmen who thereupon assembled. 

Meanwhile Tun Mahmud, a son of the Paduka Tuan, who 
had come from Selangorf 785a with a fleet of twenty sail, met Tun 
Pekerma at Buru. And Tun Pekerma said to Tun Mahmud, 
"Let us go and fetch the Ruler." Tun Mahmud agreed and 
together they went to join Sultan Mahmud Shah at Dempok. 
[It was by this time just fifteen days since the Franks had retired] 
And when they fell in with Sultan Mahmud Shah, he was delight¬ 
ed to see Tun Mahmud and he went aboard the ship Tun Pekerma 
had brought for him. He then said to the Bendahara, "What 
think you should be done now, Bendahara? Whither shall we 
go?" And the Bendahara answered, "I remember my fatherf 786 
saying that if any evil should befall the state, the Raja should 
be taken to Kampar." "Then let us go to Kampar," said Sultan 
Mahmud Shah, and he proceeded forthwith to Kampar, where he 
took up his abode. Wishing to confer a title upon Tun 
Mahmud for his services in coming so speedily to his assistance 
Sultan Mahmud Shah bade the Bendahara make his choice 
between these titles for Tun Mahmud—Tun Talanif 788 (? 
Telanai), Tun Bijaya Mahamentri, Tun Aria Bija 'diraja and 
Sri Naraf 789 (? Sura) 'diraija. And the Bendahara answered, "The 
title Tun Telanai', traditional though it may be, is a title of the 
backwoodsf 790 . Tun Bijaya Mahamenteri' is admittedly a minister's 
title but it is inappropriate for Tun Mahmud. As for Tun Aria 
Bija 'diraja', although it is the titlef 790u of his father-in-law, yet it 
is a Hujong Karang title. 'Sri Sura 'diraja' is an important title 
but it is too much of an old man's title. As Tun Mahmud came 
so speedilyf 790b to your Highness let him have the title 'Sri Agar 
Raja.' " The king accordingly conferred upon Tun Mahmud the 
title of Sri Agar Raja. And the Paduka Tuan, the chiefs and the 
officers of state all then came to present themselves before Sultan 
Mahmud Shah. 

When the news reached Haru that Bentan had fallen, 
Sultan Husain came to Kampar to see Sultan Mahmud Shah, 
who was well pleased that he should come. Sultan Husain was 
accompanied by Raja Pahlawanf 791 , his chief minister. [Raja 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



192 


The Malay Annals 

- 215 ] Pahlawan was Raja of Sri.(?) and was a prince of high 

standing in Haru. It was the customf 792 in Haru that at 
banquets the chiefs had precedence as regards food, while the 
men of valour had precedence as regards drink (?). Raja Pah¬ 
lawan had precedence in both respects, for he was not only a 
chief but a man of valour as well] 

After Sultan Husain had stayed for a while at Kampar, he 
sought leave to depart and returned to Haru. And after some 
time the Bendahara returned to the Mercy of God and was 
buried at Tambak. It is he who after his death was known as 
Bendahara Tambak. And the Paduka Tuan f 793 was made 
Bendahara. 

The Sri Awadana too had died, and it was Tun Nara- 
wangsa who became Temenggong. One day Sultan Mahmud 
Shah said to the Sri Nara 'diraja, ‘Tour services to me, Sri Nara 
'diraja, have been such that I can never requite them. But if 
you would like to marry one of my daughters, I will gladly take 
you as my son-in-law/' But the Sri Nara 'diraja answered, "I 
ask to be excused, your Highness, for I am but a slave and your 
Highness's daughter is my master." And Sultan Mahmud Shah 
said, "Why do you talk thus, Sri Nara 'diraja? Unless I thought 
the marriage fitting, would I have you for son-in-law?" And 
the Sri Nara 'diraja answered "That is very true, your 
Highness. But all mankind is sprung from the Prophet Adam 
(on him be peace). There is none of other stock: yet some 
are born in Islam, some as unbelievers: such distinctions are 
characteristic of all mankind. Seeing that all my forebears in 
bygone days were slaves of the Rajas of those times, the good 
name of Malays of those days would be impaired iff 793a I should 
now marry your Highness's daughter." Then said Sultan 
Mahmud Shah, "If you refuse to do what I wish you to do, you 
will be guilty of disloyalty to me!" 

And the Sri Nara 'diraja answered, "Your Highness is 
my liege lord! Heap curses upon me if you will, but never let 
me lose my good name or be disloyal to you!" Then said 
Sultan Mahmud Shah, "Does that mean that you are in earnest 
in your refusal, Sri Nara 'diraja? If that were so, I would find 
another husband for my daughter." And the Sri Nara 'diraja 
replied, "That is just what I would prefer, your Highness, that 
your daughter be married to another." Sultan Mahmud Shah 
accordingly gave his daughter in marriage to a son of the Raja of 
Pahang, who was a prince of ancient lineage. 

Some while after this Sultan Mahmud Shah fell sick, and he 
sent for Bendahara Paduka Tuan, the Sri Nara 'diraja and 
several of the chiefs. Then, leaning on the shoulder of the 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 




translated by C. C. Brown 195 

[ 215 — 216 ] Sri Nara 'diraja so that his forehead rested on the forehead of 
the Sri Nara 'diraja, he said, "I feel that this sickness which 
has come upon me is the sickness of death. To your care I 
commit the Sultan Muda, for he is yet but a child/' Then 
answered the Bendahara and the chiefs, "Your Highness, may 
God avert all evil from your Highness! But if the grass in your 
Highness's garden should wither, be sure that we will faithfully 
carry out your Highness' bidding." And Sultan Mahmud Shah 
was well pleased to hear the words of his chiefs. And ere long; 
he returned to the presence of Almighty God, departing from 
this perishable world to one that abideth: and he was buried with 
all the ceremony decreed by custom on the death! 79 , 4 of Rajas: 
and he was known after his death as 'He who found God's Mercy 
at Kampar'. He had reigned thirty years in Malaka and when 
Malaka fell to the enemy he went from Muar to Pahang where 
he reigned for a year. He then reigned in Bentan for twelve 
years and in Kampar for five years. He was thus on the throne 
for forty-eight years in all. 

On the death of 'Him who found God's Mercy at Kampar' 
the Sultan Muda came to the throne, with the title of Sultan 
Ala'u'd-din Ri'ayat Shah. Thereupon the Raja Mudaf 795 was 
ordered by the Bendahara and the chiefs to depart. And when he 
said, "Wherefore am I being driven away? Is it conceivable that I 
should try and wrest the throne from the Sultan Muda?", the 
chiefs merely replied, "Begonef 796 from this country, Raja Muda!" 
And he said, "Wait a while, my rice is still in the kitchen cooking!" 
But the chiefs answered, "We wait for nothing. Leave the palace 
forthwith!" The Raja Muda accordingly left the palace with his 
wife, Tunf 79Ca Trang, and a son of his named Raja Mansur: and 
said, "Tell Enche' Lemanf 797 (?) that if I should die, I look 
to her to guard the interests! 798 of (my son) Mansur Shah." 
This the chiefs agreed to do, and the Raja Muda then took 
passage in a merchantman and! 798a went to Siak. From Siak he 
went to Kang (? Klang). Now there was a man! 799 from Manjong, 
Tumi by name, who traded regularly between Perak and Klang. 
When he saw the Raja Muda at Klang he took him to Perak and 
had him installed as Raja with the title of Sultan Muzaffar Shah. 

Now the Sri Agar Rajaf 799a who had been sent by Bendahara 
Paduka Tuan to live in Selangor, was as it were Ra*ja of 
Selangor. It happened that the Sultan of Kedah had a daughter 
and the Sri Agar 'diraja went to Kedah and married her: he then 
brought her to Selangor. And Sultan Muzaffar Shah sent 
messengers to fetch the Sri Agar 'diraja from Selangor. And 
the Sri Agar 'diraja came to Perak where he was made 
Bendahara by Sultan Muzaffar Shah. Sultan Muzaffar Shah 
then had (after Mansur Shah) a daughter named Raja Dewi. 
She was followed by a son, Raja Ahmad, another son, Raja 

J952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



194 


The Malay Annals 

[ 216 — 217 ] AbduTJalil, and daughters named Raja Fatimah, Raja Hatijah and 
Raja Tengah. In all Sultan Muzaffar Shah had sixteen children 
by Tun Trang. He also had a son named Raja Muhammad by 
a secondary wife. 


Chapter XXIX. 

Sultan Ala’u’d-clin on succeeding Sultan Mahmud goes to 
to Pahang and marries the Sultan of Pahang’s sister. The 
wording of the letters sent to Siam. On his return to Ujong 
Tanah, where by this time he has established himself, Sultan 
Ala’ud-din is furious to hear that the Sri Agar Raja has been 
made Bendahara of Perak and sends for him. The Adipati of 
Kampa^ brings tribute to Ujong Tanah and is shrewdly reminded 
that the traditional etiquette for the presentation of it still exists. 
Sultan Ala’u-din for no specified reason orders an attack on 
Merbedang, which is successfully carried out by Tun Pekerma. 

(Not in Shellabeai) 

Here now is a story of Sultan AlaVd-din Ri’ayat Shah. 
After he had come to the throne, he proposed to marry a Pahang 
wife: and he commanded Bendahara Paduka Tuan to have ships 
made ready. When this was done, he set forth for Pahang, 
where he arrived in due course. And when the Raja of Pahang, 
who at that time was Sultan Mahlmudf 800 Shah, heard of the 
coming of Sultan AlaVd-din Ri’ayat Shah, he went out to 
welcome him. And when the two Sultans met, Sultan Mahmud 
did obeisance to Sultan Ala’-u’d-din Shah, took him into the 
city, seated him upon the royal throne and entertained him. 

When the propitious moment arrived, the wedding took 
place of Sultan Ala’u’d-din Ri’ayat Shah with the sister of Sultan 
Mahmud Shah. Later on, when the time came for the Raja 
of Pahang to send the gold and silver flowersf 801 to Siam, he 
began making arrangements to send an envoy with them and 
ordered ships to be made ready. When they were ready Sultan 
Mahmud ordered letters to be composed for sending to the Raja 
of Siam and to his Foreign! 802 Minister. Now it was customary in 
letters from Pahang to the Foreign Minister of Siam to use the 
word "obeisance’. It happened that when the letters were being 
composed for this Occasion Bendahara Paduka Tuan was present, 
and Sultan Mahmud asked him whether Sultan AlaVd-din sent 
"obeisance’, to thd Foreign Minister of, Siam. And Bendahara 
Paduka Tuan answered, “So far from his Highness sending "obei¬ 
sance’ to him, even I myself would not do so!” And Tun Derah- 
manf 803 said, ""Now that the men of' Pahang are sending a letter 
to the Foreign Minister, (are you not sending one,) Datok?” And 
Bendahara Paduka Tuan replied, ""I would send one but I have no 
present to send with it.” And when Sultan Mahmud offered to 
provide the present, the Bendahara accepted the offer and 
proceeded to write a letter to the Foreign Minister which began 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



[ 217 — 218 ] 


translated by C. C. Brown 


195 


as follows:—“A letter of friendship from the Bendahara to His 
Honour the Foreign Minister”, after which followed other matters. 
Sultan Mahmud then altered the wording of his letter, sending 
'friendship' as had the Bendahara. When the letters were ready, 
the envoy departed for Siam. When the Foreign Minister of Siam 
was informed of the arrival of an envoy bearing letters from the 
Raja of Pahang and the Bendahara of Ujong Tanah, he inquired 
how the letters were wordedf 8u3a . Whenthe envoy answered that 
the letter from the Bendahara was described as a 'letter of 
friendship, as was that from the Raja of Pahang, the Foreign 
Minister said, "Let the letter from the Bendahara of Ujong 
Tanah be admitted, but tell the envoy to take back the letter 
from the Raja of Pahang, for it is not customary for the Raja of 
Pahang to send 'friendship' to the Foreign Minister of Siam.” And 
the envoy answered, "How comes it that the letter from the Ben¬ 
dahara of Ujong Tanah is accepted? For the Raja of Pahang ranks 
with the Bendahara as master with servant!” To which the Foreign 
Minister rejoined "How things are done there how should we 
know? Here it is established that the Bendahara of Ujong 
Tanah ranks higher than the Raja of Pahang. If you do not 
believe me, see for yourself in the Record of Precedence! 804 . 
Order the letter from the Raja of Pahang to be altered or I will 
not accept it” A fresh copy copy of the letter was therefore 
made by the envoy, in which 'obeisance'' was substituted for 
'friendship', and the letter was accepted by the Forein Minister. 
The envoy then departed for Pahang and on his arrival there he 
related to Sultan Mahmud all that had taken place. 

After Sultan Ala'u’d-din Ri'ayat Shah had stayed for some 
time in Pahang, he departed for Hujong Tanahf 805 . On his 
arrival there Sultan Ala'u'd-din Ri'ayat Shah took up his abode 
at Pekan Tua and built an outerfort in the upper reaches of the 
Telor river. And when news reached Hujong Tanah of the 
appointment of the Sri Agar 'diraja to be Bendahara in Perak, 
Sultan Ala'u'jdi-din Ri'ayat Shah was very angry: and when 
Bendahara Paduka Tuan heard the news, he threw off his head- 
cloth, saying, "I wear no headcloth until I have brought the Sri 
Agar Raja before the Ruler!” He then went to the palace 
wearing creese and jacket but no headcloth and said, "Your 
Highness, I seek your leave—to go to Perak and call the Sri Agar 
Raja.” And Sultan Ala'u'd-din Ri'ayat Shah replied, "I would 
not have you go, Bendahara. I will send Tun Narawangsa.” 
And turning to Tun Narawangsa he asked whether he was willing 
to be sent to Perak. And Tun Narawangsa answered. "If your 
Highness sends me to conquer Perak, I will go; but if it is to call 
the Sri Agar Raja I ask to be excused, for the Raja Perempuan 
of Perak is myf 806 niece; with her I am but a servant!” Then 
said the Sultan, "In that case, it shall be Tun Pekerma to go to 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



196 


The Malay Annals 

1218 — 219 ] Perak and call the Sri Agar ‘diraja.” And Tun Pekerma said, 
"“Very well, your Highness,” and proceeded to make ready ships. 

When they were ready, he set out for Perak, where he 
arrived after a voyage of some days and went up the river as far 
as Labohan Jong. When news reached Perak that Tun Pekerma 
was come to call Bendahara Sri Agar ‘diraja, the Bendahara 
ordered that rice be sent to Tun Pekerma in the potf 806a in which 
it was cooked, together with curry in a bamboo. When this 
reached Tun Pekerma he was so much enraged by the way he 
had been treated that he departed there and then for Hujong 
Tanah. On his arrival there he went to the palace and presented 
himself before Sultan Ala’u’d-din Ri’ayat Shah who was giving 
an audience. Tun Pekerma did obeisance and took his seat. He 
then related to Sultan AlaVd-din Ri’ayat Shah what had taken 
place in Perak. When Bendahara Paduka Tuan heard the story, 
he said, “Your Highness, if any other than I is sent to Perak, the 
Sri Agar Raja will not come. Let me go to Perak. Once I am 
there I will seize him by the hand and lead him to my ship. If 
he refuses to come with me, I will draw my creese and stab him! 
It he falls to the left, I fall to the right!”! 807 . And Sultan AlaVd- 
din Ri’ayat Shah replied, “Very well then, as youf 808 please. 
Bendahara.” The Bendahara then set out for Perak. 

When he reached Perak, orders were given by Sultan Muzaffar 
Shah for him to be welcome. And when he was come into the 
palace, the king took him. into the innermost apartments and 
the royal rice was served. Then said Sultan Muzaffar Shah, “Come 
let us eat.” But the Bendahara answered, “I beg to be excused, 
your Highness: for your Highness is the son of him who was my 
master. Fall to, your Highness, and let me be given other! 809 
food.” And Sultan Muzaffar Shah said, “Why do you (? 
speakf 809a ) thus, Bendahara? Unless I thought! 810 you entitled to 
eat with me, would I have asked you to?” And Bendahara Paduka 
Raja replied, “I am entitled to eat with your Highness, and that is 
precisely why I do not wish to. Those who are not entitled 
to eat with princes hanker after doing so, that they may gain 
prestige thereby. For me however there would be no such 
acquired prestige! 811 , for I am already entitled to eat with your 
Highness. But I ask to be excused because your Highness is 
the son of him who was my master. Eat, your Highness, and 
let me feed elsewhere.” But Sultan Muzaffar Shah said, “Come, 
Bendahara, eat with me all the same, for we have long been 
parted and I have sorely missed you.” And the Bendahara 
answered, “Why is it that your Highness persists in asking 
me to eat with your Highness? I can see that your Highness 
thinks! 812 ‘if I have the Bendahara to dine with me, I 
shall have hisf 812a allegiance’. But let no such thought 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



197 


translated by C. C. Brown 

£ 219 —220] crossf 813 your Highness's mind! As long as Sultan AlaVd-din 
Riayat Shah is ruler in Hujong Tanah for me another master— 
no!" “What strangef 814 things you say, Bendahara", said 
Sultan Muzaffar Shah, and laying hold of the Bendahara's hand 
he put it to the rice, saying, “Let us hear no more, Bendahara, 
but come, let us eat!" The Bendahara accordingly took some rice 
and put it on a sireh leaf. Then he said, “Eat, your Highness." 
And when Sultan Muzaffar Shah ate, Bendahara Paduka Tuan 
also ate: and when he had finished! 815 the rice on the sireh leaf, 
he put some more on it but he took no more meat. 

When the king had eaten, Bendahara Paduka Tuan took 
his leave and departed to the house of the Sri Agar Raja. The 
Sri Agar Raja hastened to meet him and the Bendahara seized 
his hand and took him to his ship. He then went down the river 
taking the Sri Agar Raja with him and returned to Hujong Tanah. 
And Sultan AlaVd-din was well pleased that the Bendahara had 
brought the Sri Agar Raja. 

Ere long the Adipati of Kampar came to pay tribute as was 
customary: and he went to the Sri Nara ‘diraja, for the custom 
was that whenever the Adipati of Kampar, the Raja of Tungkal, 
the Mandulikaf 810 of Klang or other administrators of territory 
that paid revenue came to present the revenue they had collected, 
they went first to the Treasurer and it was hef 81Ga who took them 
to the palace. The Adipati of Kampar accordingly went to the Sri 
Nara ‘diraja because he was the Treasurer. .But it happened that 
the Sri Nara ‘diraja was ill, so he said to the Adipati of Kampar, 
“Go to the palace along with Sang Bijaya Ratna to present your¬ 
self before the Ruler, for I am not yet recovered from my sickness." 
So the Adipati of Kampar went to the palace with Sang Bijaya 
Ratna (for he was Harbour Master of Kampar) to present the 
tribute. Sultan AlaVd-din Ri‘ayat Shah was giving an audience 
at which all the chiefs were present, and when he saw the Adipati 
of Kampar approaching with the tribute, he said, “Where is the 
Sri Nara ‘diraja that the Adipati of Kampar and Sang Bijaya Ratna 
are presenting themselves unaccompanied like this?" And the 
Adipati of Kampar and Sang Bijaya Ratna answered, “Your 
Highness, the Sri Nara ‘diraja is not yet recovered from his sickness, 
that is why he is not presenting himself. It is by his direction 
that we are come thus before your Highness." And Sultan 
AlaVd-din Ri‘ayat Shah said, “Take away what! 817 you are come 
to present to me! If the Sri Nara ‘diraja is still sick, why could 
you not wait! 818 ? Merely to gratifv your desire to talk with us you 
have ignored! 819 the custom of this court" 

The Adipati of Kampar and Sang Bijaya Ratna accordingly 
took to the Sri Nara ‘diraja what they had brought to offer to 
the Ruler, and they told him what had happened. And he said, 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



198 


The Malay Annals 


[ 220 — 221 ] 


'That being the case, let us go together to the palace/' He set 
off accordingly, taking. with him the tribute of the Adipati of 
Kampar. When he was come into the palace the Sri Nara 
'diraja said, "Your Highness, the reason that I did not appear 
just now is that I was sick. It was on my direction that they 
came here without me to accompany them/' And Sultan 
AlaVd-din Riayat Shah answered, "It is no great matter, but 
what they did was not in accordance with the custom. If people 
come into the palace without your accompanying them, a blow 
is struck at the custom of this court!” The tribute was then 
delivered to the Bendahara by each Raja for the territory he 
administered. 

Not long after that Sultan Ala’u'd-din Riayat Shah sent 
Tun Pekerma to attack Merbedang. Tun Pekerma set out 
with a fleet of sixty ships, and when he reached Merbedang,. 
there was fighting tor several days, at the end of which- Mer¬ 
bedang was defeated and considerable booty was taken. Tun 
Pekerma then returned victorious to Hujong Tanah and went 
up river to Pekan Tua to present himself before Sultan 
Ala'u'd-din Ri ayat Shah, who was well pleased and bountiful¬ 
ly rewarded Tun Pekerma. 

God knoweth the truth. 

Chapter XXX 

The attempted revolution of the Malays in Malacca under 
Sang Naya against the Portuguese. Sang Naya is executed by 
the Portuguese and Sultan Ala’u'd-din executes the Portuguese 
envoy sent to inform him of Sang Naya’s death. The Portu¬ 
guese forthwith attack Ujong Tanah, the Malays are defeated 
and Sultan Ala’u’d-din sues for a truce. (Not in Shellabca^) 

Here* now is the story of Sang Naya, who had long been 
living in Malaka and had a Malaka wife—for in ancient times 
there were many Malays (there ?). Sang Naya conspired with 
the Malays living in Malaka to attack the Franks when they 
went into the church; for in ancient times whenever the Franks 
went into a church, they carried no weapons. And all those who 
were in the conspiracy with Sang Naya handed over their creeses 
to him and he hid them in his Bandanf 820 chest. 

One day one of the Franks came to the house of Sang Naya 
and asked for sireh. Sang Naya pushed the Bandan chest towards 
him and the Frank took sireh: after he had had his sireh, he 
opened the lidf 821 of the chest and beheld a large number of 
creeses in it. The Frank forthwith reported the matter to the 
Commander, saying, "Senor, Sang Naya has a large number of 
creeses concealed in a chest. What might be his object?” The 
Commander ordered Sang Naya to be sent for. When Sang Naya 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



199 


translated by C. C. Brown 

1221—222] appeared, the Commander ordered his creese to be taken from his 
waist and said to him, “Wherefore did you conceal many creeses 
in your chest. Sang Naya?” And Sang Naya replied, “Beacause I 
was going to kill you all!” When the Commander heard this, he 
took Sang Naya to the top of the fort and pushed him over the 
parapet. Sang Naya fell upright, then collapsed and died. 

The Franks then sent an envoy to Pekan Tua to report that 
Sang Naya had died because he was intending to run amuckf 821a in 
Malaka. Sultan Ala’u’d-din Ri'ayat Shah thereupon ordered the 
Frankish envoy to be arrested, hoisted to the top of a high tree 
and dropped to the ground. (This was done and) the Frank 
was killed. When the news reached Malaka that the Frankish 
envoy had been put to death by Sultan AlaVd-din Ri'ayat Shah, 
the Commander was highly enraged and gave orders for ships to 
be made ready for an attack, the tieet to consist of three galeasses, 
two long galleys, ten foysts and twenty-five brigantines. As soon 
as they were ready, the expedition set out for Hujong Tanah. 
When news of this reached Sultan AlaVd-din Ri'ayat Shah, he 
ordered the outer fort to be manned, under the command of Tun 
Narawangsa and Tun Pekerma: They accordingly went and put 
the fort in good order, and they disposed the twelve cannon, of 
which the ballsf 822 were shaped like limes and were the size of 
oranges. And when the Franks arrived, they brought their 
galeasses up the river until they were abreast of the outer fort, 
whereupon both sides fired at each other continuously and the 
din was terrific. The Franks failed however to carry the fort, so 
they landed and made a fort on the point of the river bend. Here 
they landed a number of cannon and opened fire, and the sound 
of the cannon fire was like a continuous peal of thunder. 

And the Laksamana came to see Tun Narawangsa and Tun 
Pekerma, for at that time he was in disgracef 823 at court and 
held no office. He was wearing a green jacket, black sarong and 
black headcloth, and he said to Tun Narawangsa, “It is because 
you are here that I am come hither.” And Tun Narawangsa 
gave him a suit of clothes. And the Laksamana said to him, 
“Three years have I been under the Ruler’s displeasure and 
have never had a new suit of clothes, it is only now that I have 
one.” Meanwhile the Franks kept up their cannonade and 
cannon balls fell like heavy rain, causing unbearable affliction to 
the victims: some had their arms shot away, some their legs, some 
their heads: and the outer fort became no longer tenable. And 
Tun Pekerma said to Narawangsa, “What is to be done? Let us 
fell this big kempas* tree and make a barricade of it to enable us 
to hold our ground.” Tim Narawangsa answered, “If we fell this 
kempas, it will fall towards the land and how then shall we be 
able to get it? If it falls towards the sea, we can get it.” Then 

* Coompassia malaccensis 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 




200 


The-Malay Annals 


[ 222 — 223 ] said the Laksamana, "Give me a bowf 824 ." He then secured some 


fine fishing line, to the notch on the arrow and he shot the 
arrow at the kempas tree so that the line would itself round the 
upperf 825 part of the tree. Then to the fishing line was fastened 
a piece of towf 826 -rope which was then drawn upward and to that 
was fastened some fine braid (?). As itf 827 would now fall 
towards the river, orders were given for the tree to be felled. It 
fell towards the river and was then cut into three portions and 
made into a barricade. So thick was the trunk of the kempas 
that men could stand behind it, though elsewhere not a soul 
could stand. For three days and three nights the Franks 
bombarded the fort without ceasing, and men were killed in 
numbers beyond counting. 

Meanwhile as for Bendahara Paduka Tuan, the Sri Nara 

'diraja and Sultan AlaVd-din Ri'ayat Shah-the Bendahara said 

to Sultan AlaVd-din Ri'ayat Shah, "Your Highness, I ask to be 
allowed to go down stream and see how it goes with the fighting 
men.” He then went down to the outer fort and perceiving how 
heavy was the fighting he thought to himself "This fort will 
fall, but if it does, Tun Narawangsa and Tun Pekerma 
will be killed." He accordin 



speed and reported to Sultan 


Highness, it looks to me as though the fort will fall, in which 
case your servants Tun Narawangsa and Tun Pekerma are bound 
to be killed. It will be hard for your Highness to find such 
faithful servants as they, and I suggest that they be recalled." 
Sultan AlaVd-din Ri ayat Shah then sent Hang Alamat to call 
Tun Narawangsa and Tun Pekerma back. Hang Alamat set 
off and when he reached the outer fort, he said to Tun Nara¬ 
wangsa and Tun Pekerma, "Chiefs, you are summoned." When 
the others heard this, there was the sound of scurrying feet as 
they fled, heedless of any attempt to stop them. And Tun Nara¬ 
wangsa said to Tun Pekerma, "What are we to do? The weapons 
of the Raja are many and if we go upstream, they will be lost." 
And Tun Pekerma answered, "Let us pitch them into the river." 
So the weapons and the cannon were thrown into the river and 
Tun Narawangsa and Tun Pekerma went upstream and presented 
themselves before Sultan AlaVd-din Ri'ayat Shah. And Benda¬ 
hara Paduka Tuan said, "Your Highness had better proceed to 
Sayong." And Sultan AlaVd-din Ri'ayat Shah replied, "What 
of my medang serai* vessel with its tortoiseshell bamboo wains- 
cotting? Alas that it should be taken by the Franks!"! 828 But Tun 
Narawangsa said, "Let your Highness start forthwith: I will get 
the ship away." The king therefore went up the river to Sayong, 
as did Bendahara Paduka Tuan and all the chiefs, pursued by the 
Franks. And Tun Narawangsa put a crew of twenty tribesment 82> 

* Pent ace triptera 


Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 





translated by C. C. Brown 201 

\ — 224 ] an d at the same time he ordered twenty men with adzes to wait 
abovef 829 * 1 Batu Belah. Tun Narawangsa then went up the river 
with the kings ship, hotly pursued by the Franks. When they had 
passed Batu Belah, trees were felled and a boom laid across the 
rivers: whencef 830 the place is known as the Place of the 
Boomf 830a . The Franks went up as far as Pekan Tua with tw r o 
galeasses. 

Sultan Ala’u’d-din Ri'ayat Shah then gave orders for a letter 
to be taken to the commander of the Franks; but whoever was 
sent with the letter always came back, having failed to get through 
because of the heavy fire from the galeasses. Tun 'Ali, son of the 
Laksamana, was then ordered to take the letter. And when he 
was seen approaching by the Franks in the galeasses they turned 
their guns on him so that the bullets fell like rain, and the crew 
of Tun 'Ali’s boat said to him, “Let us go back, sir, the fire of the 
enemy is too heavy!” But Tun Amat 'Ali answered, “Turn back? 
Neverf 831 ! What would be my reputation as the Laksamana’s 
son if I was given a letter to take and failed to get through with 
it? Paddle on and get me there!” The crew accordingly paddled 
on but the fire from the Franks never slackened and the crew 
leapt overboardf 832 leaving Tun Amat 'Ali standing alone in the 
boat. Then, amid cannon balls falling like rain, the boat of Tun 
Amat 'Ali drifted and finally ran aground in front of the Franks. 
Their commander ordered a rope of flowered cloth to be lowered 
and he brought Tun Amat 'Ali aboard his ship, seated him on 
a carpet and treated him with every mark of distinction. He 
then sent a messenger to Malaka with the letter that Tun Amat 
'Ali had brought. When the letter reached Malaka, the Com¬ 
mander ordered it to be duly borne in procession and read in his 
presence. When it had been translated to him, the Commander 
of Malaka sent word to the commander in the field bidding him 
accept the offer of a truce. When Tun Amat 'Ali reached 
Pekan Tua on his return journey, he was given by the Frankish 
commander robes of honour as befitted his rank and was told to 
return to Sayong with a letter of truce. On reaching Sarong he 
presented himself before Sultan AlaVd-din Ri'ayat Shah to 
whom he related all that had happened. And Sultan AlaVd-din 
Ri'ayat Shah was well pleased and gave Tun Amat 'Ali robes of 
honour. Thereafter there was a truce with the Franks and they 
returned to Malaka. 

Some time after this the Sri Nara 'diraja returned to the 
Mercy of God and was buried, with the ceremony customary for 
the burial of a chief, at Sayong: it was he who was known 
thereafter as the Chief with the Big Gravestone. Tun 
Narawangsa was then made Treasurer, Tun Pekerma became 
Temenggong and Tun Amat 'Ali, son of Temenggong Hasan, was 
made Chief Herald. This Tun Amat 'Ali was exceedingly well- 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society . 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



202 


The Malay Annals 

[ 224 — 225 ] built and handsome: no one of that time could rival him in 
anything that he did. 

God alone knoweth the truth. To Him do we return 

Chapter XXXI 

The incident of Pateh Ludang, who was brought to Ujong 
Tanah by the Sultan-designate of Pahang and was promptly 
murdered by Sultan Ala’u’d-din’s chief Sang Stia, as the result 
of an old feud. Sultan Muzaffar Shah (as he had become) 
pardons Sang Stia when sent to him bound on Sultan Ala’u’d-din’s 
orders, and mollified by being allowed to take Pateh Ludang’s 
Sakai back with him returns to Pahang. (Not in Shellabear ) 

Here now is the story of a Singapore headman, named Pateh 
Adang (? Ludang). He had offended Sang Stia and Sang Stia 
would have killed him had not Pateh Ludang fled to Pahang 
with his tribesmen, just at the time when Sultan Muhammad 
Shah, the Raja of Pahang, had died and been succeeded on the 
throne by his brother, Raja Jainad. Raja Jainad proposed to go 
to Hujong Tanah to present himself before the Ruler and he 
had ships made ready accordingly. He took Ludang (and his 
men) with him to paddle the royal barge, thinking that if he took 
them for that purpose the Ruler would give them to him. 
When he reached Hujong Tanah, he went up the river to Sayong 
and Sultan Ala'u'd-din Ri'ayat Shah gave orders for him to be 
welcomed. Raja Jainad then presented himself with the greatest 
respect before the Ruler, who gave to him the title of Sultan 
Muzaffar Shah. And Sang Stia sent for Pateh Ludang, who 
obeyed the summons thinking, "Sang Stia will not put me to 
death now that I am in Sultan Muzaffar Shah's royal barge." 
When however Pateh Ludang came to Sang Stia, Sang Stia 
killed him; On hearing that Pateh Ludang had met his death 
at the hand of Sang Stia Sultan Muzaffar Shah was very angry 
and said, "There's a vife deedf 823a if ever there was one! I thought 
that in coming here to present myself I was doing my duty, but it 
looks as though my coming was not to the liking of the Ruler's 
officers! Was it right that Pateh Ludang should have 
been taken off my barge and put to death by Sang Stia? 
Whatever they might have wanted to do, could they not have 
waited a day or two?" When Sultan Ala'u'd-din Ri'ayat 
Shah came to hear that Sang Stia had killed Pateh Ludang 
after summoning him from the barge of Sultan Muzaffar 
Shah and that Sultan Muzaffar Shah was so angry that he 
proposed to return to Pahang, he said to the Laksamana, "Go, 
Laksamana, and bind Sang Stia and take him to my brother." 

The Laksamana went forthwith to the house of Sang Stia 
to do as he was bidden. But when Sang Stia heard that the 
Laksamana was coming with orders to bind him, he ordered 
that the gate of his fence should be closed. When the Lak- 

fournal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



translated by C. C. Brown 


203 


1224 — 225 ] samana arrived and asked that the gate be opened as lie had 
been sent by the Ruler, Sang Stia said, “If, Laksamana, you 
had been sent by the Ruler to me to kill me, I would have 
allowed you to enter: but if it is to bind me, I will not allow 
you to enter. The Ruler’s command I obey, but you, Lak¬ 
samana, I will resist, for never was it heard that onef 834 war 
chief bound another!” And the Laksamana answered, “I have 
been sent here, brother, not to quarrel with you but only to 
bind you. If you consent, I will bind you. If you refuse, 

I will return and inform the Sultan.” And Sang Stia replied, 
“If you try to bind me, Laksamana, I will certainly object, 
for if you are a war-chief of high, so am I.” The Laksamana 
then went back and presented himself before Sultan Ala’u’d-din 
Ri ayat Shah, to whom he related what Sang Stia had said. 

When Sultan Ala’u’d-din Ri'ayat Shah heard the Laksamana’s 
story, he was very angry and said to the Bendahara, “Bind Sang 
Stia.” The Bendahara answered, “Very well, your Highness” 
and went to the house of Sang Stia. And when Sang Stia heard 
of the coming of the Bendahara, he hastened from his the house 
to meet him, and he did obeisance to him, saying, “For you, 
Bendahara, to bind me is but right and proper, for you are set in 
authority over me. Even your page-boy would have the right to 
do it, let alone yourself! But the Laksamana—no, I will not 
have that!” The Bendahara then took Sang Stia before Sultan 
Ala’u’d-din Ri'ayat Shah, who said, “Take him, Bendahara, to my 
brother.” And the Bendahara answered, “Very well, your High¬ 
ness.” The Laksamana and the war chiefs were commanded to 
accompany the Bendahara, and the Bendahara ordered that Sang 
Stia be bound with a headcloth. And Sang Stia said to Sang 
Jaya Pekerma, “Bind me loosely and let Sang Guna stand close 
by me: and you brother, edge your creese towards me. Iff 835 
the Pahang people begin! 836 to look nasty, give me a wink. I 
own but one master and that is our Ruler. As though any 
other Raja should be my master!” 

The Bendahara then led Sang Stia away. And when they were 
come to Sultan Muzaffar Shah, Sang Stia stood in the court-yard 
with the war-chiefs while the Bendahara went into the house to 
communicate to Sultan Muzaffar Shah the message from Sultan 
Ala’u’d-din, and he said, “Greetings from your Highness’s younger 
brother. He sends Sang Stia for whatever it may be your 
Highness’s pleasure to do with him because he killed! 831 your 
Highness’s officer.” Sultan Muzaffar Shah refused to look up and 
said not a word, so great was his anger. Then the Bendahara 
ordered Sang Stia’s bonds to be loosed, and this was done. The 
Bendahara then told Sang Stia to go into the house and do homage 
to Sultan Mazaffar Shah. Sang Stia accordingly went in and did 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



204 


The Malay Annals 

[ 225 ] homage. He then sat down, as did the other war-chiefs. Then 
said the Bendahara to Sultan Muzaffar Shah, “Why does your 
Highness keep silence? When your Highness's younger brotherf 838 
ordered Sang Stia to be bound and me to bring him to you, was 
that right? Again, your Highness, seeing that Sang Stia was a 
war-chief subject to your Highness's younger brother according to 
law, when your Highness heard that I was coming hither with 
Sang Stia, would it not have been better, while I was still some 
distance away, if your Highness had hastened out to meet us and 
ordered Sang Stia's bonds to be loosed? If I had not ordered his 
release your Highness would not have ordered it—would that 
have been right? Henceforward may there be nothing more like 
that!" 


And Sultan Muzaffar Shah answered, “I am the servant of the 
Ruler, and no servantf 839 ever disobeys the will of his master, even 
if he has to suffer thereby: by how much the less should he disobey 
a master who loads him with benefits!" And the Bendahara said, 
“That is indeed the truth. Never again let the mouth say one 
thing and the heart feel another!" Then the Bendahara turned 
to Sang Stia and said, “Hereafter let there be no more of this 
conduct, for is the Sultan of Pahang or the Sultan of Perak 
different from our Ruler? All of them are our masters—when 
all is well: in time of trouble the Ruler alone is our master." 
Then said Bendahara Paduka Tuan to SultanMuzaffar Shah, “I am 
going back. What message has your Highness for your Highness's 
younger brother?" And Sultan Muzaffar Shah replied, “Say that 
I do obeisance to him and am the recipient of his bounty. But 
if of his grace he will grant me this boon, I would ask that Pateh 
Ludang's tribesmen may be given to me." The Bendahara then 
took leave of Sultan Muzaffar Shah, and when he was come 
before Sultan Ala'u'd-din Ri ayat Shah he related to him all 
that Sultan Muzaffar Shah had said. Then said Sultan Ala'u' 
d-din Ri'ayat Shah, “Very well, we grant to him the tribesmen 
for whom he asks." And after Sultan Muzaffar Shah had stayed 
some while at Sayong, he took his leave of Sultan Ala u d-din 
Ri'ayat Shah who presented him with robes of honour as befitted 
his rank: and he thereupon departed for Pahang, where he arrived 
in due course. 

God alone knoweth the truth. To Him do we return.. 
The writer of the book is Raja Bongsu. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



COMMENTARY 


1. segala : generally, if not always, in the S.M. segala merely' 
indicates that the word it qualifies is in the plural: it does not mean: 
“all”, which is sakalian or semua. For a good illustration of 
this meaning of segala cf. Hang Tuah I, p.2 beberapa segala anak 
raja bendak meminang tuan puteri . 

l a . pada Bendabara: (? should have been omitted, see R.OAV. 
corrigenda in JMBRAS, 18, pt. 2). The MS has but 

pada hari makes no sense here. Might J3 have been’ 

intended, i.e. Sultan AlaVd-din gave orders to the Treasury to 
have the chronicle made, just as Sultan Mansur had given orders 
to the Treasury to issue rice to the defenders of Singapore (p.81,. 

1.31) ? Bendabari means in effect the State Treasury or Secreta¬ 
riat. 'Treasurer' in the S.M. is always Pengbulu Bendabari (on 
p.219, 1.42 Bendabari should read Pengbulu Bendabari) 

2 . peraturan : MS (? petutnran). This word also ; 

occurs in 1.36 below, where R.O.W. has again conjectured perturan„ 
and again on p. 165, 1.26 where however R.O.W. has allowed petu- 
turan to stand. Is there in each case a copyist’s error for o ; y / 
the old spelling of present day : or did petuturan in 

15th century Malay, mean 'descent' ? The meaning of peraturan 
here is defined in 1.36 below, viz. Salalu’s-Salatina (descent of 
kings). It looks as though peri has been omitted in error in the MS< 
before peraturan : Sh. has peri persetua dan peraturan. 

3 . (di) cberiterakan oleb yang empunyd cbetera : Sh. kata yang 
empunya cberita (cf. di-bikayatkan oleb orang yang empunya 
Pikayat ini on p. 56, 1 . 6 ). According to W. this phrase means ‘the 
author: we’. It may sometimes have that meaning but certainly not 
always. It probably does not mean much more than ‘tradition has 
it’; but it may be more specific, viz. according to the account we 
have received. ’ 

4 . di-keluari-nya : not noted by W. though it occurs passim in- 

the S.M. The precise meaning is not aways clear. Here it may 
mean simply ‘Raja K.H. went out' (cf. tiada di4uruni~nya=tiada dia 
turun on p. 62, 1 . 8 ) But in tiada berani orang mengeluari dia on 

p. 126, I.21 the word clearly means 'repel' and I think that is the 

usual meaning of keluari in the S.M. 

5 . Maka Raja Kida Hindi . imandab : evidently a copyist's * 

error: should read Maka Raja K. H. pun membawa iman-lab. Sa- 
telab sudah Raja K . H. membawa iman jadi Islam . 

6 . di-persalini : lit. given a change of raiment. A custom copied 
from the Moguls’ court. “There were (among the later Moguls) 

References in this Commentary to page and line numbers are to the* 
romanised Malay text prepared by Sir Richard Winstedt from Raffles 
M.S. 18, and published by the present Society in 1938 UMBRAS , 16 , pt. 

3, pp. 1—225). The notes on this page refer to page 42 and 43 of this- 

edition. 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society . 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 






206 The Malay Annals (Translator's Commentary) 

four degrees of khfflat i.e. dresses of honour presented by a superior 
on a ceremonial occasion; these consisted of 3, 5, 6 or 7 pieces; or they 
might as a special mark of favour consist of clothes the emperor had 
actually worn” (W. Irvine in JRAS luly 1806, p. 533). Recipients 
of^this honour in the S.M. are inter alios chiefs on first appointment 
(p. 86), visiting rulers (e.g.p.163), envoys (e.g. p. 113) and leaders 
of successful military expeditions (e. g. p. 127) Sometimes des¬ 
cribed simply as di-persalin baginda or memberi per satin akan....: 
but more often the words ( dengan ) sa4engkap-nya to denote the 
completeness of the per satin, as described on p. 86, or (dengan) 
saperti-nya 'appropriate to his rank are added. 

7 . saperti pakaian diri-nya : the word pakaian = 'things worn', 
e.g. ‘clothes’ as pakaian baginda sendiri at the foot of p. 45, or 
‘ornaments’ ‘jewellery’ (as habitually in Kelantan now) e.g. persalin 

. dari-pada pakaian yang nmlia-mulia _ manikam on p. 45, I.19 

The ‘ornaments’ would be such as are described in App. G of Win- 
stedt and Wilkinson’s History of Perak (JMBRAS, 12, 1934). 

8. sembah: as a verb stands simply* for anything ‘said’ or ‘sub¬ 
mitted’ by a subject to a Raja: for brevity’s sake I have merely 
translated as ‘say’ ‘reply’ etc. 

9 . tiada ada . kehendak : should read tiada ada tara-nya 

lagi, kehendak . 

10. keluar-lah ka-penghadapan: in this context keluar means 
‘come out of the (inner apartments of the) palace’, ‘appear in 
public’ in fact (the converse of ?nasok ‘go into the (inner apartments 
of the) palace or ‘retire’) ancj receive company in the hall of audience 
( balai ); the place of each person in the balai being very carefully 
determined and in the case of distinguished visitors a matter of 
considerable political importance. Not only had the Raja his ‘hall 
of audience’, but so had his ministers from the Bendahara (see 

p. 163) downwards (cf. Seri Nara ‘diraja .on p. 120, I.42). 

There is no real English equivalent for di-adap orang. In the case 
of the Raja I have translated ‘give an audience’, but this is not 
entirely satisfactory. 

11. dengar-nya : should read di-dengar-nya as in Sh. 

12. anak hamba . mengerjakan dia . yang ada ini : the 

words in brackets in this passage have been interpolated from Sh, 
They can, I think, be omitted, in which case yang ada ini refers to 
sahaya-nya. A sahaya as a household worker ranked higher than 
a hamba who worked in the fields. 

13. s udahdah hamba kahwinkan: odd, considering that the 
necessary consent had not yet been given? 

13 a . mas: so Sh., but the MS has atas-nya , i.e. to be paid by 
Raja Iskandar. 

14. segala perdana menteri: should read segala para - 

menteri : there was only one perdana menteri. 

14a. hulubalang : see R.O.W., The Malays, p. 51 for the account 
given in ‘Adat Raja-Raia Melayu of the meaning of the terms 
biduanda , kshatriya (S.M. cheteria ), periai y perwira , sida (S.M. sida- 
sida) and hulubalang. There is little evidence from the S.M. to 
corroborate that account, except possibly as regards kshatriya 
(1 cheteria ) and sida {sida) 

These notes refer to pages 43—45 of Winstedt’s romanised text: 
see footnote on p. 205, antea. 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 











207 


translated by C. C. Brown 

Biduanda : mentioned on p.68, I.36 as being present with ra/a- 
ra/a, menteri etc. at a royal audience, but they come last in the 
list and may well have been nothing more than pages or palace- 
orderlies (see W. sub voc.) Cf. Hang Tuah I, p.19 anak menteri.. 
akan jadi biduanda di-dalam istana. The biduanda Chinz on p.118, 
I.31 and the anak biduanda Muar on p.127, I.34 were certainly not 
biduanda such as are described in the ‘ Adat Raja-Raja Melayu 

Cheteria : on p.85, 1.2 and p.86, I.14 they are classed with anak 
raja-raja (in Kedah Laws, R.O.W., JMBRAS, 6 pt. 2, p. 42 cheteria 
are defined as anak raja-raja ) : and the references to Sri Rama on 
on pp. 121, I.45 and 177, I.33 shew how high was his standing at the 
Malacca court as a cheteria 

Sida-sida: mentioned passim as attending royal audiences: 
they have a place of honour in the balai (p.84, last line). On p.115, 
I.16 Tun Indra Segara is described as asal sida-sida (see note thereon). 

Periai : the only mention is on p.162, first line 

Pewira: mention is on p.104, L25 as perwira yang asal-blrasal . 
See also note perawangan on p.56, I.45 

Hulubalang : on p.67, I.5 Badang is made a hulubalang (cf. also 

Hang Tua 4 h I, p.18_ di-jadtkan hulubalang) on p.75, l.n we read 

of Siamese hulubalang. In the S.M. the term seems merely to con¬ 
note a ‘fighting-man’ (Skeat in his Malay Magic translates huluba¬ 
lang as 'war-chief’ and I can think of nothing better). Cf. the 
definition in Pahang Laws (R.Q.W. and J. E. Kempe, JMBRAS , 21, 
pt 1, p.26) di-jadikan oleh segala raja-raja itu hulubalang akan per - 
hiasan kerajaan-nya dan bagi menolakkan mar a bahaya 
raja ia-lah akan mendinding segala seteru musoh __ 

15. di-kenalkan-nya akan pegawai : the MS has di-katakan-nya 

akan pegawai and Sh. has di-kenakan-nya akan pakaian. Surely 

pakaian must be right? The MS di-katakan-nya makes good sense 
"he declared them to be the jewellery of his daughter.” 

16. di-anugerabi: after this the MS has persalin and there 

must be an omission of some conjunction before sa-ratus 

17. sa-akan-akan rupa: the MS has tersalin akan rupa-nya. 

Cf. the expression salin tak tumpah when used of the resemblance 
of one person to another, 'the very spit of.’ 

18. tersebut-lah perkataan: the Malay translation of Al-kesah . 

W.does not quote this phrase. The clue to its meaning will be 

found in Awang Sulong y p. 27 hilang cherita baginda . tersebut 

perkataan tuan puteri ‘leaving for the moment the story of the king 
we come now to the (tale of) the princess’, i.e. tersebut perkataan 
means not so much 'it is . related’ as 'the story is now set out/ 

negeri: more often used in the S.M. to mean 'city’ than ‘country’. 
It was an Indian concept centring on a ruler’s capital. 

19. Raja Shulan : see R.O.W., Kingship and Enthronement 
(JMBRAS , 20, pt. I) p.129 

20. mengempong: the copyist has sadly confused himself in the 

MS over the words kampong and kepong (old form kempong ) 
Thus on p.49, I.23 and on p. 199, I.43 what obviously should be ber- 
kampong he writes a^ anc * what appears correctly as kam- 


These notes refer to pages 45—48 of Winstedt’s romanised text: see 
footnote on p. 205, antea. 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society . 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 





208 The Malay Annals (Translator's Commentary) 

pong on p. 51, I.24 is written in the MS. Conversely what 

appears as di-kepongkan-nya following the MS on p. 201, I.37 should 
clearly be di-kampong-kan-nya ! 

21 . batu hitam : black hornblende, see Q. Wales, Archaeological 
Researches, JMBRAS, 18, pt. I, pp. 78—9. 

21 «. berjuangkan gajah-nya . pedang-nya : the meaning 

conveyed by ber....kan in this passage is not the same in each in¬ 
stance. Berjuangkan gajah-nya evidently = ' made their elephants 
fight the elephants of the enemy’, as juang is iproperiy applied to 
the 'fighting’ of elephants with each other. But bergigit-kan kuda- 
nya may mean 'made their horses fight with their teeth.’ Bertikam- 
kan lembing (-nya MS) should mean ’ thrust at each other with their 
lances’: but it is doubtful whether any reciprocal action is express¬ 
ed in berpetekkan panah-nya 

22 . maka segera ia tampil: MS maka Raja Simian pun segera 

tampil fmenguchap seru 'hurl a challenge’ ? 

23. rampasan : the story on p.201 of the looting of the Brunei (?) 
ship suggests that female captives constituted an important part of 
any rampasan . Cf. also p. 158 I.33 where merampas is immmediately 
followed by a mention <bf the capture of three daughters of the Raja. 

24. tujoh buah gunong : cf. the description of the city of Yak 
(?) on p. 135. 

25. pelbagai . di-sana: should read, following the MS, 

pelbagai kayu-kayuan, dan segala bunga-bungaan dan segala buah- 
buahan yang di-dalam dunia ini ada-lah di-sana and I have translated 
accordingly. The meaning of buah-buahan here is 'fruit-trees’, not ‘fruits 
of all sorts’ (W.): cf. segala buah-buahan yang sudah berbuah on p.51, 
last line. 


26. berburu atau menjerat gajah : so Sh. and the MS ly y 

may be only a copyist’s error for berburu atau. It may on the other 
hand represent berbiiat ra(n ) tau : in Kelantan the word ra(n)tau is 
commonly used for 'ground’ or\ ‘place’ for sport 

27. Hikayat Ham^ah: see R.O.W., Malay Literature ( JMBRAS , 
17 , Pt. 3 ) ? P. 59 . 

28. peti sa-buah kacha : an error for sa-buah peti kacha as in 
I.34 below 

29. termasa melihat : W. does not note this adjectival use of 
termasa , though Marsden does. Cf. main termasa on p. 60, I.20 

30 . Moga-moga : W. under moga-moga I does not cover the 
whole ground. Neither here nor in muga-muga dengan Pakdir Allah 
ta’dla on p. 114, I.3 nor on p.99, last line has the word any optative 
sense, and it merely means ‘presently’: while in Hang Tuah I, p.40 
we find muga-muga-lah ada anak H.M. berdiri di-hadapan kita tadi 
where it obviously=ww;wr 'fortunately.’ 

31 . indah-indah : not so much 'fine: precious: fair’ (W;) as 
‘impressive’: cf. apa-apa yang di-lihat Sultan yang endah-endah on 
p.210, l.i 

These notes refer to pages 48-—54 of Winstedt’s romanised text: see 
footnote on p. 205, antea. 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV ? Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 






translated by C. C. Brown 


209 


32 . terbampir : more likely, I think, terhampar (the stage in padi 
growth known in Perak as padi tengah mengampar) lit. ‘there was a 
carpet of ripe rice.’ 

33 . Chahaya apa gerangan: more probably cbahayta apt 
gerangan. Api is written ^J\ in old Malay spelling 

34 . bernyala-lah: MS here and on p. 55, 1 . 6 , <)L y Bernyala-lab 
may be correct here but it cannot be on p.55. Possibly what was in¬ 
tended in both cases was > (bernyala-nyala), the V* having been 
attached by error to the J 

35 . sa-rasa: omitted by Sh. and is used oddly here if the MS 
is correct. Sa-rasa melihat should mean ‘as though I saw it’ (cf. 
minum ayer sa-rasa duri) y but it seems here to have the same mean¬ 
ing as rasa-nya. 

36 . ketiga-nya dudok di-alas gajab puteh : how many ‘white 
elephants’? R.O.W. (p. 18) says one. I should have said three, ketiga- 
nya in this sentence having the same meaning as in ketiga-nya 
memakai pakaian kerajaan two lines above 

37 . karna kami . ka-mari ini: I suspect the text here, as the 

sentence manusia . ka-mari ini comes in awkwardly and abruptly. 

The Sh. version karna kami pun lama-lab di-sini y tiada kami meli¬ 
hat sa-orang pun manusia datang ka-mari ini is what should have 
been written here. 

38 . dari Bukit .: Sh. ka-bukit y which is what the con¬ 

text seems to require, the point being, one would have thought, that 
they were come down from heaven, not fromi Bukit G.M. But dari 
Bukit G. AL is repeated on p. 101, l.n; and on p.123, I.31 we have 
turun daripada Bukit G.M. : otherwise one might have taken dari 
here as= di (cf. dari-atas bubongan-nya on p.157, I.20, where dart 
= di) 

39 . di-jemput : according to W. jemput means ‘greet’ ‘invite/ 
and this seems to be the meaning in di-jemput oleh bonda tuan-ku 
on p.59, I.40. Elsewhere in the S.M. the usual meaning seems to 
be fetch with ceremony’, e.g. menjemput surat Raja Perlak on p. 

p.68, I.38 or baginda nunyurohkan . menjemput saudara-nya 

ka-Manjong on p.79, l.n. (I fancy that in datang tak berjemput 7 
pulang tak berhantar which W. quotes, the real meaning is ‘coming 
without being fetched—see p.85 herein, I.39—and going back with 
no escort’) The word used in the S.M. for ‘greeting’ in the sense of 
‘welcoming’ is alu-alu. 

39 . a Tanjong Pura: north of Deli in N. E. Sumatra 

40 . muntahkan bueh : hence the family of Muntah Lembu, 
see p.96, I.45 

41 . Abo . permaisuri : see Appendix A 

42 . chiri : see R.O.W., History of Perak ( JMBRAS y 12, pt. I, 
p.175) and R.O.W., Kingship and Enthronement, JMBRAS , 20, 
pt. 1 , p. 135) See also note on mengenakan dia on p.86, 1.8 

42 a . perawangan dan perdaraan: so Sh. See p.105, I.17 of this 
text where perawangan empat puloh itu are apparently the same 
people as perwira yang asal-berasal empat puloh mentioned on p. 


These notes refer to pages 54—56 of Winstedt’s romanised text: see 
footnote on p. 205, antea. 

J952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 









210 The Malay Annals (Translator's Commentary) 

104, 1*25. We may have there the explanation of the term pera v 
wangan used here, viz. a sort of Corps of Noble Youths established 
for personal attendance on the Ruler? Perdaraan may represent a 
similar institution—young girls chosen as Maids of Honour for at* 
tendance on the Raja Perempuan ? 

43. barang di-mana-mana: Sh., better, barang di-mana-mana 
raja-raja yang ada beranak perempuan yang baik paras 

44 . isteri : MS anak isteri , a good example of anak isteri 
standing for wife’ only and not ‘wife and children’ which is the 
meaning it seems to have on p.186, I.3 

45 . oleh di-jamah: should read di-jamah oleh. 

46 . ada sa-orang anak-nya : would read better ada sa-orang 

anak-nya perempuan , terlalu baik . 

47 . diqqad : MS cJi In the other MSS there is the un¬ 

intelligible di-persembahkan. Sh. has di-suroh pinang oleh Sang 
Si-Perba. In this text on p.no diqqad appears twice but the MS 
there has Could here be an error for ( di-pinta ) ? 

48 . tiada di-ikat-nya : this undertaking seems to have been 
easily forgotten cf. e.g. p. 225, I.3 

49 . memberi e aib . di-binasakan: cf. the story of Sang 

Ranjuna Tapa on p. 81. 1 .18 et sqq. Pada has been omitted by 
error here before sa-orang hamba Melayu 

50 . suka-chita: the MS adds melihat anak-nya selamat tiada 
berbahaya 

51 . berlengkap : one of the few instances in which this word 
is used in the S.M. without reference to ships. It generally means 
(in the S.M.) 'get ready ships’: in one instance the ships are actually 
mentioned (p.73, I.23). memandikan ; for a description of this cere¬ 
mony see R.O.W., Kingship and Enthronement, p.132. 

52 . perdana me’nteri: see note 14 referring to p.45, l.i. Sida - 
sida: see note 14 a on builubalang. 

52 a . dari peti Darmani _ berdaimai: Sh. has darapati darmani 

buru daimani . A Telugu scholar tells me that these may represent 
Telugu words, viz. darapata dermai and burudai-mani . He says 
that darapata is a garment like a dhoti, made of silk and probably 
bejewelled, while dermani is derived from derma and meansi ‘a person 
who is derma i.e. ‘virtuous’. Burudai is a female’s garment like a 
sari and burudai-mani would mean ‘a jewelled burudai .’ 

53 . berangkat^lah . berangkat-lah : evidently an error in 

copying; the first berangkat-lah is out of place and should be 
omitted 

54 . berkira-kira: hot noted by W. and the word seems to be 
used with two shades of meaning in the S.M. Thus in berkira- 
kira hendak menyerang on p.51, 1.8 immediate action follows and 
the word seems to mean ‘took steps to’, whereas in this instance 
advice is first sought and the meaning seems to be ‘propose’, 
‘meditate’. 


These notes refer to,pages 56—58 of Winstedt’s romanised text: see 
footnote on p. 205, antea. 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vql. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 







translated by C. C. Brown 211 

55. lanchang pemujangan: Sh. has lanchang mas p. and the 
mention of lancblang perak in this line suggests that mas has been 
omitted by error here. For pemujangan see W. under bujang II. 
C & S. say 'bachelors quarters'. ? a yacht carrying S.T.B. and the 
menfolk only. pf. P.2D7, I.14. R.O.W. conjectures *an old cor¬ 
ruption of perbujangan = a dragon - boat, i.e. a boat with a dragon 
as figurehead' 

56. Bentan: now generally known as Riau. For the geography 
of the S.M. see the map at the end of this journal, based on that 
•given on p.261 of Winstedt’s 'History of Malaya’ ( JMBRAS , 13*, pt. 1, 
1935 )- 

57. nobat\ references to nobat in the S.M. may be grouped as 
follows:— 

(a) rulers of neighbouring countries coming to Malaka hendak 
memohonkan nobat , pp. 163, 176 and 197: cf. also p.206; 

(b) ruler installed ( di-nobatkan ) 7 pp. 59, 120, 168 and 204; 

(c) the ceremony described as mengadap nobat pp. 87 and 202; 

(d) as a sign of mourning baginda tiada nobat y pp. 93 and 168. 

In (a), (b) and (c) it looks as though the' reference is to the big 
drum ( gendang nobat ) only—originating probably with the drum of 
the pawang , see R.O.W., Malay Magician, p. 10; and all that we 
are told of what happened at a mengadap nobat is contained in the 
jangan nobat di-palu dahulu on p. 202, 1.10. 

The accuracy of W.’s definition {< nobat (Pers. nau-bat: nine items) 
means ‘Royal band of nine items' " is doubtful: but that nobat in the 
S.M. may have included other (instruments than the gendang is in¬ 
dicated by di-anugerahi Sultan Mansur Shah payong , gendang 7 
seruai dan nafiri on p.120, I.32 the text may be corrupt, see note on 
maka seri Bija *diraja ibid.): and it is likely that in (d) above there 
may be a reference to a royal orchestra such as is described on pp. 
159-60 of W. and W’s History of Perak (JMBRAS, 12, pt. 1): see 
also Linehan's article on nobat (JMBRAS , 24, pt. 3). 

57 a . sembah . salam : see notes 211 referring to p. 93. 

I.36 and 244 referring to p.98, I.34. 

58. pergi-lah dari T. Ruas : Sh. pergi-lah y maka dari Tanjong 
Ruas y which is clearly right 

59. ka-dalam negeri : the MS has masok ka-dalam pada Wan 
Seri Benian nama-nya 

60. ka-Tanjong bermain: ?ka-Tanjong Bemian, as stated in 
I.18. Sh., ka-Tanjong Bemban . 

61. Apa kerja . ka-Bentan: Sh. apa kerja anak kita pergi 

bermain ka-sana ? As this conversation took place in Bentan, the 
text as it stands cannot be right. Either (a) Bentaii is an error for 
Bemain or (b) the word jauh has been omitted after bermain (cf. 
hendak bermain jauh in I.7 below) and the passage should read thus:— 

Apa kerja anak kita pergi bermain jauhf Ka-Bentan tiada-kah 

rusa pelandok .I prefer (b) and have translated accordingly. 

Pergi bermain is undertood before Bentan, hence the ka- 


These notes refer to pages 59—60 of Winstedt’s romanised text: see 
footnote on p. 205, antea . 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society . 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 







212 The Malay Annals (Translator's Commentary) 

61 a . kandang . kurongan : the context requires that these 

words should mean enclosures into which wild animals are driven for 
capture’ as elephants are driven into kubu (see W. sub voc.) 

62 . perburu: ? berburu as Sh. 

63 . kain ; \jU y : unidentifiable Sh. kain terhampar 

64 . menyaberang : ‘started to cross’: the verb here is used to 
describe the initiation of an action not completed. So. kembali often 
in the S.M. means ‘set out on the return journey’ rather than ‘return’. 
Cf. di-angkat-nya-lah (batu itu ) oleh pablawan Keling itu tiada 
terangkat on p. 67, last 2 lines. 

64 a . Wan Seri Benian telah hilangdah \ Sh. adds Maka anak 
Demang Lebar Daun di-rajakan baginda di-B.entan, bergelar Tun 
Telanai. For Tun Telanai see note on p.214, 1.2 

65 . datang-lah peridaran dunia : Spenser’s 

“ever-whirling wlheele. Of change, the which all mortal things doth 
sway.” 

66. tiada di-turuni-nya : = tiada ia turun : Cf. di-banguni-nya 
=dia bangun on p. 158, I.4 and see note thereon which applies mutatis 
mutandis here. The precedent set by T.P.P. Berjajar was followed 
by Bendahara Sri Maharaja, see p. 160, last line 

67 . di-jadikan... .Ferdana Menteri . Dendang : the text is 

confused here. There are four appointments in question, viz. 

(1) Ferdana Menteri , given to Demang Lebar Daun’s son, with 
the title of Perpateh Permuka Sekalar 

(2) PengJmlu Bendahari , with the title of Tun Jana Buga 
Dedang 

(3) Temenggong y with the title of Tun Jana Petra_(?) 

(4) principal hulubalang f with the title of Tun Tempuong G. 

I have suggested in the translation how I think the passage should 

be read. 

68. segala ferdana menteri : see note 14 referring to p.45, l.i. 

69 . cheteria : see note 14 a on lmlubalang referring to p. 45 

70 . dengan f adat-nya -- .kola: not Malay as it stands: should 

read as in Sh. ( masing-masing pada mertabat-nya 7 demiki/m-lahj 
‘adat'-nya pada zaman purba kola. 

71 . raja di-Tanjong Pura : Paludatani, see pp‘. 55—6. 

72 . Lebeh daripada itu : the MS has the more emphatic lebeb 
daripada ini pun 

m 72 a . hisab: W. under hisab does not note a use of this word 
which is common in the S.M., viz. with the meaning “(take) ac¬ 
count (of),” whether as a substantive as here or as in hisab pun ia 
tiada p.211, I.35 or in verbal form kata orang itu tiada di-hisab-kan-nya 
p.213, I.24 

72 . k terhisabkan : so Sh. The MS has terkatakan 

73 . terlalu ramai: in Hang Tuah II, p.184 we read terlalu ramai 
gelak-gelak antara lima orang itu. Five people can hardly be described 
as terlalu ramai in the sense of ‘in large (numbers’: in that context 
the meaning of terlalu ramai must surely be ‘heartily’, and I have a 
feeling that in the majority of instances in which terlalu ramai is 
used in the S.M. the meaning is ‘strongly’ ‘fiercely’ and not ‘in large 
numbers.’ 

These notes refer to pages 60—63 of Winstedt’s romanised text: see 
footnote on p. 205, antea. 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & Ilf 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 







translated by C. C. Brown 


213 


tiada sangka ... .mati: I suggest re-punctuating as follows:— 

tiada sangka bunyi (- nya ) lagi: daripada kedua pihak . mati 

Cf. daripada kedua pihak pun banyak-lah-mati on p.148, I.23 

74. maka kami .: should read maka kami simpan-kan, see 

. R.O.W. corriggenda loc. cit. Cf. Risalat Hukum Kanun, 6 telah 
kami simpankan pada hukum kanun itu 

75. bangsa-ku : MS which should be 5* — kupu- 

kuf See W. under kupu 

75 a . menitahkan\ the word titahkan is used throughout the 
S.M. with the meaning ‘appoint for a special duty' ‘commission’ or 
in fact practically ‘send’, cf. p.68, I.22 titahkan ka-Singapura 

76. Sa-telah surat... herti-nya : it is unlikely that Raja J.R.M. 
either read the letter himself or understood its contents uninter¬ 
preted. Sh. has telah sampai kapada baginda , maka di-suroh\ bacha 

pada jurubahasa : satelah di-ketahui .which is obviously the 

correct account of what happened. 

77. di-alu-aluk.an\ just as Sultan Maliku’s-Saleh himself wel¬ 
comed the Raja of Perlak’s daughter on p. 73-. This was a courtesy 
that Sultan* Mansur did not extend even to the daughter of the Raja 
of China: she was merely welcomed by chiefs! (p. 118) 

78. maka . kebesaran : ? add, as in Sh., di-sambut baginda , 

di-bawa ka-Singapura. 

79. ntusan : was this the Jmlubalang who escorted the princess? 
Ordinarily the mention cf utusari postulates a surat , but we are not 
told of any surat from Kalinga. 

80. mangkat : MS (Fmenangkat). On p. 90 there is 

another odd spelling of what should be mangkat , see note 202 on 
maka anakanda on that p., line 26. See also p.215, I.40. 

81. di-chapak-nya : not known to W. or Marden. The MS has 

? di-chepok-nya. C. & S. give chepok with the meaning 

‘dabble with the hand in the water (so as to make noise)’ Omit the 
words I have enclosed in' brackets and di-chepok-nya would fit here. 

82. riding : MS ^j, ; ? redang 7 see W. sub voc. Leyden- 

translates ‘among the reeds’ and I think he is right. Riding ‘noose’ 
is unsuitable here. 

83. ^ / may stand for the Perak word terkemamar-mamir 

(‘confused’) 

84. jangan-lah }aku kau-bunoh : should mean ‘dont kill me (kill 
some one else if you like)’ The MS has jangan-lah engkau ku-bunoh 
which is even more puzzling. 

85. di-penggang: for this old spelling of pegang cf. berpeng- 
gang on p.89, I.20 (note 199 a ). 

86. dengan tangan-nya juga : should read dengan sa-belah 
tangan-nya juga. 

87. menembang: old spelling of menebang. Cf. me - 

ngempong ( mengepong ) on p. 148, I.38 and penggang ( pengang ) 

These notes refer to pages 64—66 of Winstedt’s romanised text: seer 
footnote on p. 205, antea. 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 








214 The Malay Annals (Translator's Commentary) 

on this p., 1.3-3. Bangat amat suchi : Sh., better, maka bangat . 

See note on maka tiada tabu on p. 144, Li 

88 . di-jadikan... hulubalang: see note 14 a on hulubalang . 

89 . Sa-telab : ? sc. itu f otherwise the sentence has no main verb 

90 . tarob-nya: = the stakes of it. i.e. of the match Cf. 

timbang-nya ini-lab akan taroh-nya on p. 196, I.4 

91 . titabkan : see note 75 a above 

92 . biduanda : see note on hulubalang on p. 45. 

93 . menjemput : see note on di-jemput on p.56 

94 . m:embawa gajab a letter from Perlak was evidently 

deemed patut bergajab , see p. 85, I.31 

95 . bunyi-nya: see p.119, 1.2 and p.217, 11 .20-31 where it is clear 
that the bunyi of a letter was its opening words, and I fancy that 
this is the meaning in most instances in the S.M. 

96 . menchuba kuat Badang: should read menchuba kuat 

dengan Badang as in Sh. 

97 . kelakuan-nya: ‘how he shapes’ in fact. 

98 . kelawan : MS 5 " Fan error for ( kelakuan) 

as in Sh. 

99 . sa-jam malam: Sh. sa-jam lama-nva, but would the envoys 
have become drunk in an hour? I suggest sa-jamu malam ‘a 
night’s feasting.’ 

100 . takut mengadu : the semi-nlay on words of this mengadu 
is more effective than Sh. menjadi beseliseb 

101 . batu rantai : is this the same as the rantai yany menjadi 
batu rantai on p. 67, 1.6 ? If so, this parenthesis about Benderang* 
comes in oddlv. Sh. omits the earlier mention of the batu rantai 
(on p. 67) and describes the laying of this boom as a joint effort of 
Benderang and Badang ! 

102 . di-arak : should read di-surok arak 

103 . bergaiah) y di-kepilkan di-balai: the highest honours that 
could be accorded, see p. 85, I.27 (note 173 a refers). 

103 a . Pasai: in Acheh, N. Sumatra, to the south of the Jambu 
Ayer river 

104 . kerja-nya : 50 Sh. (the MS has 0^-^ )• The use 

of kerja-nya followed later by sa-telab berapa lama-nya demikian 
juga suggests that the trap was set, and gelang-ge<lang caught, a 
number of times. According to the Hkt. Raja-raja Pasai however 
this only happened twice. 

105 . di-rebus-nya : this version of the storv omits the explana¬ 
tion given^ in H . R. Pasai , viz. Maka Merab Silu pun pikir dalam 
hati-nya , “ Babwa gelang-gelang ini kurnia Allah] ta’ala akan aku 
rupa-nya , whereafter he proceeded to boil them. 

106 . hendak di-bunob-nya : probably not to be interpreted 
literally. The phrase does not occur in the H.R.P. version, accord- 

These notes to refer pages 67 — 70 of Winstedt’s romanised text: see 
footnote on p. 205, antea . 


Journal Malayan Branch [VoJ. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 





translated by C. C. Brown 


215 


ing to which Merah Chaga (Hasum—H.R.P.)’s grievance against his 
brother was in regard to the catching of buffaloes and % is expressed 
as ia memberi aku main juga ... .nyab-lah ia dari negeri ini . 

107. di-emasi-nya : not noted by W., C. & S. or Marsden. Used 
later to describe the ‘sweetening' necessary to the successful abduction 
of Tun Teja and the Sultan of Pahang's elephant, pp. 160-75 

107 a . Semudra : in N. Sumatra, on the north side of the Jambu 
Ayer river 

107 b . sudah : MS oju (muda-mudahan) . Here 

as on p.76, I.23, the word mudah-mudahan has the meaning of 
gerangan (‘perchance’) rather than its usual optative sense. 

107 c . Fansuri : in N. W. Sumatra : presumably the birthplace 
of Hamzah Pansuri, see R.O.W., Malay Lit., p.96 

107 d . Lamiri : on the northernmost tip of Sumatra 

107 e . Ham : appears in the map in R.O.W., History of Malaya, 
as Aru Bay in Acheh, Sumatra 

107 f . Yang bernama : should read Di-mana yang bernama..,. 
as in Sh. 

107 «. Perlak : presumably the place which appears in some 
maps as Porolak, to the north of Aru Bay 

108. mengupas . saudara-nya : a better punctuation wouid 

be mengupas pinang akan saudara-nya 7 berkain.. .It is Puteri 

Gengga.ng’s dress and beauty, not that of her sisters, that is sub¬ 
sequently described. (This accords with the relevant passage in the 
H. R. Pasai) 

109. Maka sembab Saidi A .: according to the H. R. 

Pasai the choice of Puteri Genggang was only made after Saidi A. 
had reported to Sultan Maliku’l-Saleh and the latter had consulted 
the astrologers ! % ' 

110. dan akan Tun P. P. : there must be an omission here: 
we are not told what Tun P.P. received 

111 . di-negeri Perlak : evidently inserted in error. Why should 

they have grown up in Perlak? Sh. has. besar-lab 7 dan negeri 

Perlak pun alah. 

112 . jangan . bersaudara : Sh. has jangan kamu beri ber- 

cherai dan, bersalahan ia dua bersaudara which is clearly correct and 
also follows the H. R. Pasai. 

113. Raja Semudra : the annalist goes badly wrong with his 
nomenclature in what follows. Semudra was the kingdom of Sultan 
Maliku’l - Mansur (p. 74): but the Raja taken in captivity to! Siam 
was Sultan Maliku’tL-Tahir (p.77, I.7) who was Raja of Pasai. After 
describing the captivq as Raja of Semudra until towards the bottom 
of p. 75 and mentioning the attempt of hulubalang Raja Semudra to 
rescue their master, the annalist suddenly tells us that Raja Pasai 
was carried off to Siam. Yet it was Raja Semudra who was made 
to tend thei palace fowls in Siam. The rescue from Siam was made 
by the chief minister of Pasai, yet when they returened home it 
was to Semudra} that they went ! The Sh. version is equally confused 
in this respect. 

114 . bingga _ belayar: an elliptic way of saying that the ships 

set out one after another until they had all sailed? As they were 
going as merchantmen they would not have sailed as a fleet 

These notes refer to pages 70 — 75 of Winstedt’s romanised text: see 
footnote on p. 205, antea . 

1952 ] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 









216 The Malay Annals (Translator's Commentary) 


115. di-bawa orang-lah : not in Sh. Presumably the 
Semudra people are referred to, but if so, why no mention of the 
usual processional honours being accorded to the letter? 

116. turun-lah : after turun-lah the MS has ka-jong-nya 
membawa Raja Pasai lalu di-layarkan-ny a kembali and I have 
translated accordingly 

117. saperti-nya : the nya is not in the MS. For pakaian see 

note 7 referring to p. 43 * 

118. membeli dagangan ‘Arab ... chara ‘Arab: the punctuaton 
here follows Sh., but I suggest the passage should read 

dan membeli dagangan ‘ Arab . Kama orang Pasai . bahasa 

‘Arab, maka Saidi ‘Ali . 

The statement (for what it may be worth) that the Pasai people knew 
Arabic has more relevance to the crew of the ship pretending to be 
Arabs than to the purchase of Arab merchandise? 

119. sa-bahara mas: it seems to be clear that in Portuguese 
times in Malacca a bahara weighed about 400 lbs. avoirdupois. What 
is not certain is the value of gold at that time. If it was only a 
quarter of its present value this present was worth over £10,000 ! 
See on this point R.O.W., History of Malaya, p.58. It is noticeable 
that in Hang Tuah I, 81, the value of the whole of the mercandise 
in a ship, which from the context was valuable, is put at sa-bahara 
mas. 

120 . Apa juga kehendak-mu: should mean not ‘what do you 
want?’ but ‘what do you want?', which sounds odd as a first question, 
though it is correct in maya juga kehendak in I.31 below. Sh. 
has no juga here and I think it has been put in by error. 

121 . maya: see Preface to this text. The word occurs 
altogether six times in the S.M., four times on this p., once on 
p. 78 and once again on p. 95. It is evidently a synonym of apa. 

122; mudah-mudahan: see note 107 b , referring to p. 71, I.44 

123. : kimqt-nya (Ar. kimat ‘value’) 

124. Maya apa: MS maya juga 

125. gembala: MS ? ngembala = mengembala which 

occurs on p. 150, 1.12 

126. fitnah: used here in the ordinary sense of the word in 
Arabic, viz. ‘discord’ or even ‘war’ : on p. 81, I.15 di-fitnahkan has 
the usual meaning of the word in Malay viz. blander’ 

127. Telah berlaku-lah hukum Allah: MS presumably 

by error for y Cf. bahwa hukum Allah ta’ala berlaku-lah 

pada hari ini on p. 187, I.16 announcing the impending execution 
of Bendahara S.M. The remark of Saidi A. here is prophetic, 
referring to the fate which was in store for himself and his master, 
see pp. 78-91, below? 

128. Sa-telah itu . kapada Sidtan Mahku’l-Tahir: A com¬ 

parison of this obscure passage with the Sh. version indicates that 
what was intended was 

Sa-telah itu , maka kedengaran-lah khabar (bahwa) Sultan 

Maliku’tl-Tahir , di-kbabar-kan orang , sudah ada di-Jambu Ayer; 

dan khabar Sultan Maliku’l-Mansur (berbuat pekerjaan tiada 

These notes refer to pages 75 — 77 of Winstedt’s romanized text: see 
footnote on p. 205 antea. 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 







translated by C. C. Brown 217 

patut itu ) pun telah kedengaran-lah ka-pada Sultan Malikutl- 

Tahir . 

and I have translated accordingly 

129. minta di-alu-alukan raja : Sh has minta di-alu- 

alukan. Apparently this means that Sultan M. T. asked Sultan 
M.M. to welcome him at (? Kuala) Jambu Ayer (half way between 
Semudra and Pasai). Sultan M.M. accordingly went down the river 
to meet his brother, but Sultan M. T. went upstream from the Kuala 
(?), then up the Ketui, leaving Jambu Ayer before Sultan M.M. 
had reached the junction of the Jambu Ayer with the Ketui and 
purposely missing his brother out of pique? 

130. bukan-lah ^5 y nama-nya: the speaker’s name was 
evidently Tukang Sekarat and he makes a play on his name Tukang 

130 a . kerjakan : on p. 186, I.12 and p. 193, I.25 this word 
seems to mean ‘make an end of’, ‘kill’ in fact: but the context sug¬ 
gests that it can only mean something likq ‘carry out’ (a plan) here. 

131. segala . di-luar : this is part of the order given by 

Sultan M. T. Sh. has di-surob tinggal . 

132. Manjong: mentioned on, p.204, I.41 as one of the negeri 
ta’alok baginda ( Sultan Mahmud Shah) yang arah ka-barat. Not 
indentified with certainty., Possibly a place lost when a flood changed 
the course of the Perak river. According to H. R. Pasai Sultan 
M.T. had been advised by Fun P.T. to send his brother ‘a long 
way from this city’, on the principle jauh dari mata y jauh dari 
bati ! The place named in the H. R. Pasai is Temiang: there 
is an island of that name in the Lingga archipelago, but there is 
also a Temiang in Acheh. 

133. Padang .Maya ini : should read Padang may a ini? 

(what plain is this?). For maya see note 121 referring to p.76 I.21 
of the text. 

134. Padang Maya itu : should read padang itu : there is 

no maya in the MS 

135. ahmak : here used in its ordinary sense of ‘foolish’: but 
this meaning- will not fit on p. 177, I.44 where the world clearly 
means ‘covetous’ ‘worldly’ 

136. menjemput : ‘fetch his brother from Manjong’. Cf. 
jemput ka-Selangor on p.216, I.23 and see no'.e on di-jemput on p.56 

137. badan-nya . di-Langkawi: Sh. has simply badan-nya 

gJjaib tiada berketahuan 7 but adds later ada suatu cbetera, badan 
Tun J)ana Khatib itu teirhantar di-Langkaui di-tanamkan orarig 
dt-sana : itu 4 ah di-pantunkan oramg 

Telur itek dari Sigapura, 

Pandan terletak di-langkahi; 

Darah-nya titek di-Singapura , 

Badan-nya terhantar di-Langkawi 

jstS**+* ’ ? — sa-kepal ‘a clot’. For a similar spelling corn- 

fusion see I.14 above where ka-pembunoban appears in the MS as 
: also on p.205, I.3 which almost certainly repre¬ 

sents ipar 

These notes refer to pages 77 — 80 of Winstedt’s romanized text: see 
footnote on p. 205 antea. 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society . 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 








218 The Malay Annals (Translator’s Commentary) 

137 a . ferdana menteri : read paramenteri 

137 b « di-tikam todak itu y : I conjecture ber - 

gantang-genjang mati-lab : see W. under gantang IV and genjang. 

41 -.* is presumably an error for a common spelling in the MS 

of mati-lah 

138 . lagi mati : flalu mati. 

139 . bantu memarang dia: Sh. datang orang menetak dia . 
Apparently bantu memarang = bersama-sama memarang 

140 . w menanggongkan bak-nya....: lit. he laid his rights as a 
burden upon the city. Cf. Risalat Hukum Kanun, sec. 8, yang 
membunob itu wajib di-bunoh pula supaya bak-nya jangan ter- 
tanggong atas kita 

141 . ‘umor baginda : sc. di-atas kerajaan 

142 . asal-nya (JAr" : same spelling of sedia in the MS 

is found on p.150, 1.2, p.154, I.27 and 173, 1.2. 

143 . f : = perjenggikan , a word still used in Negri 
Sembilan with the 'meaning 'expose’. 

143 a . di-bujong pasar : the word bujong generally means the 
'further end’ of a thing as opposed to pankal 'the near end’ cf. 
sesat di-bujong jalan t balek ka-pangkal jalan) : but it is evident 
that in the S.M. in several instances it merely means 'one end’, as 
■e.g. di-ujong balai on p.85, I.27 whereas on p.140, I.15 the context 
almost certainly demands that bujong jambatan means ‘the near 
end’ of the bridge.’ 

144 . maka : should read cS*1 = dua keti, see 

R.O.W. corrigenda , loc . cit. 

145 . maka segala . pergi-lab : Sh. maka sakalian-nya pun 

belay ar-lab 

145 a . itu-lab maka : = sebab itu-lab . Cf. p.223, I.5 and see 

note 386 referring to p.127, I.9 

145 b . ka-tepi : MS terus ka-tepi 

146 . mengajari: MS yy* which I suspect to be menga- 

cbara (for cb being written as j see note (6) on p. 226). Raffles 
MS 80 p. 78 reads which is clearly mengacbara , cf. 

p. 164, 1.2.^ There is no point in mengajari here, but the story 
°f^Tun Perpateh Hitam on pp. 163-4 illustrates the meaning of 
mengacbara and the reference to menfieri on p. 164, I.3 confirms 
the probability that the word here is mengacbara. Cf. also Seri 
Rama, (JSBRAS, No. 71) p. 74 where bebenar acbara-nya is given 
as one ofj the duties of a Raja. 

147 . bebuat bentara : presumably the reference here is to the 
number and duties of the heralds: there was, nothing new in 
bentara as such. 

148 . alat raja: to be carefully distinguished from alat 

kerajaan . Both are described in detail on p. 85. See note 169 refer- 
ring to p.85, I.15). _ 

These notes refer to pages 8i0— 82 of Winstedt’s romanized text: see 
footnote on p. 205 antea. 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vof. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 





219* 


translated by Q. C. Brown 

149 . Sa-telah hari : should read Sa-telah itu, hari 

150 . Takutkan shaitan : may be correct, but I think Takut 
kena sbaitan more likely 

151 . kutaha: see R. O. W. ’s Preface. 

152 . bendahari . bendahari . bendahari : so the MS in 

each case but obviously in error, see beginning of next paragraph 
Maka kata bendabara 

153 . raja: the vocative, I think, as in the sentence begining. 
apa ‘alamat-nya in I.36: the ini qualifies bahasa yang dusebut . Cf 
also p.190, I.35. 

153 a . mengbaru raja: MS mengaru-ngaru raja ini 

154 . ‘ Asar sekarang: so Sh., but the MS has waktu ‘asar 
pada saat lagi 

155 . Saiyid ‘ Abdu'l-aiii: see p. 129, I.18 

156 . bendahari: ? Bendabara 

157 . baginda yang pertama melebakkan: for the description 
which follows of procedure etc. it is interesting to compare Kedah 
Laws, pp. 33-44 (R.O.W, op. cit) 

158 . enggan: seems here to mean ‘except’, though this meaning, 
is not noted by W. The MS has (? anugerab) which makes no 
sense 

159 . panjang: ? pancbong 7 see note on berkam memancbong 
on p.157 of the text. 

160 . berkeris di-hadapan: relevant to the incident described 
on p. 109, second para. 

161 . denda mati: Sh. di-denda patt, yaani sa-kati lima . Not 
so however Risalat Hukum Kanun, sec. 1, which prescribes di- 
bunoh as the penalty. The Sh. text may have deliberately sub- 
stututed the milder penalty as being more humane and therefore 
more creditable to Malay Sultans ? 

162 . dudok: strictly speaking this verb and all those that 
follow for the next three pages should be translated 'were/was to 
(sit etc)’, to indicate that this is a description of procedure and 
not of a single transaction: but for brevity’s sake 1 have merely 
used the past tense. 

163 . Seri balai: the ‘body of the hall’ as opposed to the side 
galleries etc? 

164 . anak cbetena: not in Sh. Anak cbeteria probably 
only = cbetena , cf. p. 98, last line. 

165 . jadi bendahari: Sh. has jadi Bendabara which is clearly 
correct 

166 . di-tapakan: Sh., better, di-ketapakan balai 

167 . kepala bendabara: should read kepala abentara as in 
the MS 

168 . segala nakboda Cbempa . balai itu: Sh. has ada pun 

nakboda Cbempa yang pilehan dudok di-sen balai: maka segala 
anak tuan-tuan yang bersahaja - sabaja dudok di-selasar balai: 
and it looks as though that is how the passage should run. Alter¬ 
natively yang should be omitted in this text before dudok to give 
the sentence a main verb. Incidentally the Sh. version "indicates 

These notes refer to pages 82-—85 of Winstedt’s romanized text: see 
footnote on p. 205 antea . 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 






220 The Malay Annals (Translator's Commentary) 

the identity of these anak tuan-tuan who are frequently mentioned 
in the S.M. (e.g. p. 104, I.25 and p. 191, I.35). I take yang 
bersahaja-sahaja to mean ‘of good family but nothing more' i.e. 
holding no office (1 tiada kena kerja raja). Who were the nakhoda 
Chempa? The establishment of the Cham community in Malaka 
evidently occurred appreciably later, see p. 137. These nakhoda 
Chempa I take to have been sea-captains who had some standing 
in Malacca as important traders. One of them appears in the 
story of Tun Teja, p. 170, l.n 

169. alat raja: Sh. has segala perkakas raja, saperti ketur 
dan kendi, kipas dan barang sa-bagai-nya and makes no mention 
of perisai and panah which go so oddly with ‘cuspidores, goglets 
and fans’ that the correctness of the MS here is suspect 

170. jikalau ada utusan datang : the procedure hereinafter 
described is far from clear The Sh. version, which 
verbably corresponds to a large extent with this text; has the 
advantage that it puts the events in their right order, whereas this 
text describes what is to be done on the arrival of the letter at 
the balai before describing the procedure for getting the letter 
to the balai. Combining the two versions I gather the procedure 
to have been as follows:- When the arrival of the envoy (generally 
di-kuala) was announced, a large tray ( kerikal ) and a salver ( chepir) 
were produced from the palace ( dari ddlam) by a slave. These 
were brought into the balai, and the kerikal was set down had 
Bendahara (? ‘as near to the throne as the B. sat’). What subse¬ 
quently happened to the kerikal we are not told: but the chepir 
was then given to the man who was to ‘bring the letter’ (i. e. from 
the envoy’s place of arrival) to the balai in procession ( di-arak , not 
mentioned here but mentioned hereafter passim ), the type of pro¬ 
cession and the marks of honour accorded to the letter varying with 
the rank of the sender of the letter. When it reached the balai 
it was received by the chief herald on the right and read (no pro¬ 
cedure is prescribed here for the reading) and the Raja’s Utah com¬ 
municated to the envoy by the herald on the left (a written reply 
was almost invariably delivered to the envoy before he departed). 
Could the kerikal have been used for the bingkisan or customary 
present which accompanied the letter? 

171. alat kerajaan: the gendang must have been omitted by 
error. It is mentioned in line 30. 

171 a . payong puteh: thereby signifying the acceptance of Pasai 
and Haru as independent sovereign states net subject to Malacca. 

172. dua buah negeri itu : Sh. has jika surat dari Pasai atau 
dari Haru , and it looks as though dua buah negeri itu here means 
Pasai and Haru. Cf. sa-buah pun negeri tiada menyama-i Malaka 
melainkan Pasai , Haru, tiga buah negeri. itu muda pun raja-nya 
berkirim salam juga on p. 125, I.40 

173. jikalau tua muda . salam juga : cf. Wan Sri Benian’s 

message on p. 59, H.35-6 and Sultan Mansur’s letter to China on p. 
118, last para. For the importance of the wording of a letter in 
this respect cf. the incidents related on pp. 08 and 146 and see p.125, 
H.41-3. And contrast Hkt. R. R. Pasai p.9, 1.8 jikalau tua sakali pun 
berkirim sembah juga ia kapada Raja Pasai dan jikalau muda sa¬ 
kali pun Raja Pasai, berkirim salam juga ia 

These notes refer to page 85 of Winstedt’s romanized text see 
footnote on p. 205 antea. 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 





translated by C. C. Brown 


221 


173 a . jikalau patut,' bergajab .what was probably intend¬ 

ed was jikalau patut bergajab, bergajab; jikalau patut berkuda, 
berkuda. See lines 41-2 below 

174. Jika utusan Rekan sa-kali pun : ?thus described because 
Rekan, on the East coast of Sumatra and opposite Malacca, was 
comparatively near at hand. 

175. jemput : see note 39 on di-jemput. 

176. di-bawakan gajab: ‘he was brought by elephant’ 

177. mengenakan dia : from Megat Terawis (a Malay play 
by Teh Fatimah: Macmillan, 1951) I take the following description 
of the investiture of Megat Terawis as Bendahara of Perak 

Megat Terawis pun datang-lah ka-istana dan di-sambuti oleh 
Bentara yang ada berdiri di-kaki tangga istana itu. Bentara 
Dalam pun memkawa sa-helai daun pisang serta di-bentangkan 
ka-atas kepala M. T. Maka To’ Sri Nara ‘draja pun membacha 
surat sumpab yang be mama surat chiri di-atas kepala M.T. 
Sa-telah di-bacha , surat itu pun di-let akkan ka-atas daun pisang 
itu . Lepas itu M.T . di-bawa naik ka-atas istana 

This description omits mention of the chiri being read di-hadapan 
raja (I.5 above in this text): but it shews what is meant by mengena¬ 
kan dia here, i.e. the chiri was laid on the banana leaf which had 
been put on the head of the chief being installed 

178. sa-chepir baju: one would expect instinctively baju sa- 
chepir y which is precisely what appears in I.16 below, and I suspect 
the text here. It is notewo.hy that no reference is made here to the 
presentations mentioned on p. 159, H.35-40, as customary on the 
appointment of a bendahara and other officers of state. 

179. di-}ktri .( Laksamcma ): according to this text a;s it 

stands the Laksamana was in two places at the same time. The 
Sh. version differs appreciably, putting the Pengh Bendahari and 
the Laksamana at the head of the litter and ,the Sri Bija ‘diraja 
(by himself) pada rantai dekat kaki raja. 

180. di-hadapan raja segaia alat itu : Sh. di-hadapan raja 

segaia bentara memikul pedang dan di-hadapan itu segaia orang 
berlembing. This is evidently how the passage, should run: segaia 
alat itu has crept into the MS by error. 

181. chogan : see W. under jogan 

182. mengadap nobat: see note 57, on nobat . I can 

find no information as to sireh nobat other than what is given here. 

183. pertama anak raja-raja : after this should have come dan 
Bendahara as in Sh. 

184. raja berkerja: festivities in honour of the marriage or 
circumcision of scions of the ruler 

185. di-balai . balairuang: Sh. omits di-balai . There 

is nothing in the S.M. to Shew what distinction was made between 
baHai and balairuang 

186. menyuroh menguchap orang : obscure. The MS has 
which presumably stands for menyuroh meiiguchapi. Possibly 

menguchapi orang means to ‘call out the name’ of a person to whom 
the Raja wished to speak, such person being present, as opposed to 
memanggil ‘sending for’ someone not present? 

These notes refer to pages 85—87 of Winstedt’s romanized text: see 
footnote on p. 205 antea . 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 







222 The Malay Annals (Translator's Commentary) 

187 . mengatur orang makan : for a vivid description of how 
one particular Temenggong perfomed these duties see p.160, l.i3y 
et sqq. 

188 . orang makan itu: for a description of a royal banquet 
see JMBRAS, II, pt. 2, p.279. 

189 . istemewa yang di-atas : 'still Jess could people from 

above.’ The sense 'by how much the more/less', as. the case 

may be, can also be conveyed by ini pula (cf. the saying tidak hujan 
lagi bechak ini ( kan ) ,pula hujan ) and by ini konon as on p.168, I.33 

189 a . sa-hidangan dengan anak raja-raja : it is noteworthy that 
according to Hang Tuah I, 84, the Temenggong shared the Benda- 
hara’s dish 

189 b . mengarak : ? sc. Laksamana 7 as in I.44 below 

190 . bulan Ramdlan malam dua-puloh tujoh : see W. under 
kadar (Lailat al-k.) 

191 . gantang-gantang : other MSS gendang . It is possible 

however that gantang-gantang is correct, as very great importance 
was attached to standard weights and measures, see Kedah Laws 
(op. cit.) p. 23. 

192 . beserban . jubbah itu : the MS is faulty: either 

— lab has been omitted after itu or an r after jubbah 

193 . di-arak oieh Pengh. Bendahari : so Sh., but the MS has 
di-arak masok di-rumab P. B. ( di-rumah evidently = dari rumah 
as commonly in colloquial Malay, e. g, turun di-rumah) and I have 
translated as in the MS. 

194 . raja pun... .gajah: the MS has raja pun berarak-lah dari 
dalam, keluar di-atas gajah and I have translated accordingly 

195 . Bendahari : read Bendahara. There was no such minister 
as the Bendahari: the title throughout the S.M. is Penghulu 
Bendahari 

196 . naik: the Raja was already on the astaka , so the sense 
here must be 'assisted the Raja on to the litter/ Sh. has Bendahara 
segera naik menyambut Raja naik ia ka-uscmgan 

197 . barat -- Terengganu Ujong Karang: Sh. has arab 

ka-barat hingga Beruas Ujong Karang , arab ka-timur Ityd Tereng¬ 
ganu 

198 . anakanda yang muda : why this Muhammadan Raja was 
succeeded on the throne by his younger son is not explained 

199 . chuki ..... .hijau: see P.M.S., Malay Amusements p. 58. 

I take it that in this instance the "sixty white pips" (mentioned there¬ 
in) were ‘red gems’ (? rubies) and the "sixty black pips" were ‘green 
gems’ (Pemeralds) 

permata buah-nya : Sh has the more usual buah-nya permata 

199 a . berpenggang cf. penggang on p.66, I.33 (note 85 .) 

200 . di-ambil menantu: this comes in very abruptly there 
must be an omission in the MS. Sh. has sa-telah datang ka-Malaka+ 
lalu mengadap Sultan Muhammad Shah . Maka di-dudokkan baginda 
tara menteri. Telah itu di-ambil oleh Seri Nara * diraj a .... He was 
apparently given the title Tun Bijaya Maha Mentri, see p. 95, I.44 

These notes refer to pages 87—90 of Winstedt’s romanized text: see 
footnote on p. 205 antea . 

Journal Malayan Branch (Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 








translated by C. C. Brown 


223 


201. di-dudokkan . tara Bendabara : not in Sh. and the text 

here is evidently corrupt as we read in I.21 dudok di-bawah Benda - 
hara. Moreover di-turutkan postulates some previous advice or 
request, as e.g. in I.7 on this page, and we are not told what it was, 
though it resulted in the Raja of Rekan having to take a lower place. 

202 . Maka anakanda baginda : preceeded in the MS by Sa- 
ielah Sultan Muhammad Shah cX&* : this obviously has the 
same meaning as mangkat. Is it the same word? Hardly, one would 
think, as it ( cXi* ) occurs again on p.215, I.40 and also on 
p.104 of the Seri Rama (op. cit) and it is unlikely 7 
that mangkat would be misspelt not only in the S.M. but also in 
the Seri Rama. See also note 80 referring to p.65, I.26 

203 . memangku Sultan A.S.: Sh. adds memerentahkan negeri 
Malaka 

204 . ada sa-orang maulana : Sh. has, more probably, ada sa- 
■orang saudagar , be mama Maulana Jalalu ddin 

204 a . Saperti-nya : ? read dengan saperti-nya 

205 . Slmkur-lah : the MS has <Xi, = suka-lah 

206 . sa-lama-nya di-ikut : obscure. MS cX b Sh. sa-lama- 

nya pun hamba hendak .. 

206 a . mengerjakau : a polite way of saying 'kill' : cf. p.186, 
I.12 and see note on kerjakan referring to p.193, I.25 

207 . karna sangat sabur: Sh. adds lagi orang banyak sakit 
hati akan Raja Rekan 

207 a . Kitab undang-undang: R.O.W. agrees with me that this 
is the Risalat Hukum Kanun or Undang-Undang Melaka and he is 
amending accordingly what he says in his Malay Lit., p.112, regard¬ 
ing the date etc. of this Code 

207 b . Radin Anum : son of Sultan Megat, see p.82, I.47 

207 c . dukachita pergi : Sh. has more correctly, dukachita , Mu 
berangkat 

208 . baginda tiada nobat : see note 57 on nobat. 

209 . tiada kena kerja raja : the inference is that he felt himself 
slighted by not being given any office at court. Cf. his, own words 
(as Bendahara) on p.144, last line, jikalau engkau tiada berkerja 
raja, hendak-lah engkau diam di-hutan. To one born at the court 
of Malacca living at Klang might well seem to be diam di-hutan 

210 . Bubunnya : Cannot be identified as a Siamese title, 
unless it is a corruption of Borama which was part of the title 

borne by Siamese Kings in 15th century. Possibly the word is 

connected with Bana, a mid—15th c. Mon royal title, which has 
survived in Burmese as binnya , • 

211 . surat sembah : i. e. a letter in which the writer sends 

his sembah and thereby admits the overlordship of the Raja to 

whom he is writing. See note on jikalau tua muda. \... .salam juga 
on p. 85, I.28 

212. Awi Chakra:, not a personal name, cf. Ami Dichu on 
p.75. Chakra is an obsolete Siamese titH = 'provincial administrator/ 

These notes refer to pages 90 — 93 ©f Winstedt's romanized text: see 
footnqite on p. 205 antea. 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 






224 The Malay Annals (Translator's Commentary) 

213. jikalau: — apabila (there could be no question of Tun 
Perak not coming mengadap). Cf. jikalau surat itu sudah di-bacha 
on p. 142, I.37 

214. tanah Semudra : should read Pateh Semudra as in the MS. 

215. Amarat: Sh. Anterta. Neither word can be identified. 

216. pedang sa-bilah itu juga : the phrase postulates previous 
mention of the pedang. The omission in the MS is supplied by Sh, 
and what should have been written here is 

Hai y Seri Amarat , ( akan) tuan hamba ( di-jadi-kan yang di-pertuan 

bentara , di-anugerabi pedang sa-bilah) pedang sa-bilah itu juga 

hendak-lah . 

217. kami orang berkerja : Sh. adds ini m The words orang 
berkerja (ini) define kami 

218. di-mana tuan hamba tabu: cf: the mu tabu dewana ( di - 
mana) = 'how do you know? of contemporary Kelantan Malay 

219. pada fikir: so Sh., but the MS has 
pekerti 

220 . apa hisab-ku pada-nya : Sh. apa hisab pada kami sakalian 
i.e. ‘what concern is it of ours (down there in Klang) ?’. The -ku 
here is clearly erroneous and should be omitted: the sentence then 
means what concern is it of theirs (i.e. of the men of Klang in Klang) 
V His argument is ‘people in Klang may not be greatly concerned 
over what happens to distant Malacca. But bring the men of Klang 
up to Malacca with their womenfolk and they will fight well, in¬ 
cidentally for the Raja though principally to preserve their women¬ 
folk from falling into the enemy's hands.’ 

221. di-ambil . sireh puan : Sh. has, more correctly, di- 

ambil baginda sireh dari puan baginda . beri-kan kapada Tun 

Perak . For the importance attached to this mark of royal favour 
cf. the story of Tun Bayajit on p. 151. It was an Indian custom, 
see Malik Muhammad, Jaisi, ed. A.G. Shirreff, p. 293 

222. tiada-lah alah: the — lah is not in the MS and should 
be omitted 

223. di-himpunkan-nya : Sh. di-champakkan-nya , which is 

more probable, for why should they have ‘collected together’ the 

rattans? Possibly of the MS is an error for 

‘they flung them down’? See note on di-himpun-kan-nya on p. 149, 

1.3 

223 a . itudah . Rotan Siam : must mean ‘ a clump of 

rattans known as the rattans of the Siamese’, i.e. not a different 
species of rattan called rotan Siam : no such species seems to be 
known. Were the reference to a place, the words tempat itu would 
probably have been inserted (cf. p.82, I.15) No place of that name 
exists nowadays on the Muar river. 

224. kayu bora: so Maxwell MS 26, but Sh. and all the other 
MSS have kayu ara 

225. Tuan y Seri Amarat : the opening sentence of this speech 
should read as on p.94, see note 216 on pedang sa-bilah juga on p.94, 

1-27 _ 

These notes refer to pages 94—95 of Winstedt’s rcmanized text: see 
footnote on p. 205 antea . 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 






225 


translated by C. C. Brown 

225 a . baik juga ... .tabu: obscure. Sh. has baik juga pada kami , 
maka kami kerjakan , karna yang di-pertuan tahu akan baik-nya 
juga pada kami tiada tabu akan jabat-nya . The word jabat here 
apparently means 'what is difficult or unpleasant' ( pahit maung-nya) 
and the sense of the passage seems to be as in the translation, though 
I am not altogether satisfied about it 

226. hendak mencbcrcba akan kami: so Sh., but the MS 

has (mengacharakan kami dengan dia), see 

note on I.31. The dengan dia clearly refers to the man who made 
the complaint, cf. Tun P. P. pun berachara dengan dagang itu pada 
Bendahara on p.163, last line but one. 

227. pecbat-lab bamba dabulu : the MS adds dari Kclang itu 

228. ajarkan : surely acbarakan as in Raffles MS 80? 

229. sa-bagai mana bamba di-ajarkan : the MS adds dengan sa- 
bagai bamba and I take the whole sentence to read sa-bagai mana 
bamba di-acbara-kan dengan sa-bagai bamba . If the dengan refers 
to the man who made the complaint (see note on mencberch'a above), 
the argument seems to be "as long as I am headman of Klang, I 
refuse to be brought to judgment by a' man who is sa-bagai bamba ’ 

230. dudok di-balai : his own balaif See note on keluar-lab 
ka-pengbadapan on p. 44, I.9 

231. tiada muafakat : this laconic statement is considerably 
amplified in Sh. 

231a. pada Seri Nara "diraja : should read as in the MS pada- 
nya y mob on juga ia 

231 b . Tun Kudu: see p.93, I.17 

232. di-maiia . tabu: see note on p.94, I.30. This was no 

idle boast on the S.N. di-raja’s part: he had several children’ by 
Tun Kudu, see p.116, I.21 

233. sedia anak Bendahara: see p. 93, I.19 

234. ora?ig bijaksana . nama-nya: the meaning apparently 

is "there were three outstandingly able administrators at that time, 
the B.P.R. in Malacca, (and the then holders of the offices of) Pateh 
A. G. M. in Majapahit and Raja Kenyan in Pasai.’ That P.A.G.M. 
was an office and not an individual person appears from p.101, I.37, 
and it seems unlikely that the Raja Kenayan mentioned here is the 
same individual as the Raja Kenayan mentioned on 3x126, I.40. It 
is noticeable that Bendahara Sri Maharaja "the grandest of all the 
Bendaharas’ (p. 160, I.44 is not described as bijaksana despite the 
tribute to his qualities as an administrator on p.159, I.42, et sq. 

235. Seri Nara " diraja pun menjadi Pengb. Bendabari: So 
Sh., but why repeat what we have already been told at the foot 
of p.89? 

236. datang-lab: Sh., more corectly, datang pula , as this was 
the second attack (incidentally, pace R.O.W., p.20, both the Siam¬ 
ese attacks are described' in Sh.) 

237. berlengkap: as the second Siamese attack was by sea, 
berlengkap here has its usual S.M. meaning of "making ships ready’: 
but for once in a, way we are given no details of thei fleet. 

238. Muntab Lembu: see p.56, I.31 

These notes refer to pages 95—96 of Winstedt’s romanized text: see 
footnote on p. 205 antea. 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 






226 The Malay Annals (Translator’s Commentary) 


239. nyireh . tumu . api-api : there seem to be no 

English equivalents for these trees, all of which grow close to the 

sea shore. 

239 a . membuat : MS memahat 

240. di-nyanyikan orang : the verse which follows is trans¬ 
posed in Sh. to follow the death of Chau Pandan 

240 a . Ada chinchin . ayer mata : obscure. In Sh. the last 

line is Bunga beladong si-ayer mata. W. translates the verse (see 
under ladong) but his translation in the 193-2 edition differs from that 
in the earlier edition. I doubt the correctness of either. I suspect 
the text and have merely to give the sense required by the context 

241. mali : MS sudah mati 

242. Sultan Mu^affar Shah pun memberi titzh: the story 
that follows is told in Sh. (pp.87-8) of Sultan Mansur 

243. Lalai mana butan di-kelati : this verse to be in.elligible 
should run 

Lalai-lalai, mana butan? 

Butan lagi di-kelati; 

Kakak Tun Telanai, mana pungutan? 

Pungutan lagi di-Tanjong Jati ! 

I am in debt to R.O.W. for the elucidation of it 

244. sembah . salam. .. . .kaseh: for sembah see note 

on surat sembah on p. 93. Salam ‘greetings’ as from equals to 
each other when both are Muhammadans, cf. jikalau tua muda 
sa-kali pun berkirim salam juga of the rulers of Malacca, Pasai and 
Haru on p.125, I.40. Kaseh ‘friendship’ as from equals to each 
other where the person addressed is a non-Muhammadan (?) cf. 
surat kaseh daripada Bendahara datang kapada Adi Berake- 
lang on p.217, I.23. Why Sultan Muzaffar would not send a surat 
kaseh in this instance is not clear. 

244 a . di-suroh arak : not a flight of fancy on the part of the 
writer, as must surely be the description on p.223*, I.25, but an estab¬ 
lished practice in Siam at this period 

245. datang kapada _: the MS has datangkan orang mem - 

bawa epok dan kemendelima (sic: should keme'ndclam as on p. 
21,0, I.35) 

246. gajah di-kepilkan: the highest honours in fact, see p. 
85, I.26 

247. mengambul di-atas belakang-nya : for a similar story 
see Hang Tuah II, p.250 

248. gila-gila : MS % jS which I take to represent 
J S (kebal belaka) 

248 a . jahat... baik-baik : the reference here is not to moral 
qualities but to breeding. Orang jahat means here, as on p.183, I.21, 
‘a man of the people’ in contrast to orang baik-baik ‘men of good 
family.’ Baik-baik in that sense is common in colloquial Malay 
and it is odd that W. does not note it. 

249. Mari-lah Sh. mari kita mengadap : beta-Jah ber- 

datang sembah.... But the MS has 3^'—' Ju- 


These notes refer to pages 97—99 of Winstedt’s romanized text: see 
footnote on p. 205 antea. 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 










translated by C. C. Brown 


227 


which I read as sedia kita mengadap sa-cbara abentara-lab berdatang 
sembah. This seems to mean 'all we have to do is to present our¬ 
selves (before the king) like heralds and submit a request’. 

250. muga-muga: see note 30 on moga-moga. 

251. kemudian maka orang Siam: Proximus buic , longo sed 
proximus intervallo in fact. Maka here, as often in the S.M., = 
baharu . See also note on p.144, l.i of the text. 

252. katib : so Sh., but the MS has the usual spelling khatib 

253. Ada-pun . Laksamana: not in Sh. No Laksamana 

of the name of Tun 'Ali Haru is mentioned later. 

254. Radin Galob Aim Kesuma : subsequently described as 
Puteri Nai Kesuma 

255. Aku ini raja Tciijong Pur a : the copyist has evidently 
strayed here, for (a) the boy was not the Raja of T.P. but his son 
(b) in no conceivable circumstances could he have spoken of him¬ 
self as aku in this context (he always refers to himself subsequently 
as bambd). Sh. has, correctly, hamba anak raja T.P. 

255 a . Sang Maniaka : see p. 56, II.21 et sqq. 

255 b . permain : an unusual use of per-. ? a mere slip of the 
pen for bermain which Sh has 

255 c . menyampang: Sh. sa-nyampang 

256. sa-pala\ Sh. sa-pala~pala which is the more (usual 
form of the word. Cf. the saying (sa) pala-pala mandi 7 biar basab 
(if you are going to have a bath, get wet) 

257. di-timang-nya : cf. Raja Mu^affar Sbab itu-lab di-timang- 
kan baginda akan ganti baginda on p. 194, I.29. In both cases the 
reference is to a youn^ boy. Here the sense seems to be 'to say 
in fun’ ? (when dandling a child) but p. 194 the word seems to mean 
designate’. Cf. also peri timang on p. 103, I.26 

258. di-jadikan P.A.G.M. : see note 234 on tiga orang 

259. sa-teng.ab orang berkata : the MS adds memuji , hence 
mengatakan in the next line 

260. lompati : so Sh., but the MS has ? tbempani, 

a verb irregularly formed from cbempana with the meaning ‘carry 
off in a litter’ 

261. segala negeri : Sh. has berkeliling negeri dan peminggir 
Majapabit which is clearly more correct 

262. menteri: the MS has presumably an error for 

paramenteri 

263. Knravg-kurang : see note on kurang ia berlawan-kan 

on p.94 

264. Maira-tab janji : should, I think, read Mana-tab janii 

paduka batara dengan aku (sic: ? kula) dabulu bendak menjadi- 
kan kula . 

265. mudab-mudaban : here used in' its usual optative sense, 
in contrast tp the instances on pp. 71 and 76 

266. peri timang: see note on di-timang-nya on p. 101. Sh. 
here has meminang ? presumably an error for menimang. 

267. maka man: MS jika matt paman 

These notes refer to pages 99—103 of Winstedt’s romanized text: see 
footnote on p. 205 antea. 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 




228 The Malay Annals (Translator's Commentary) 

268. kelengkapan Singapura juga : the significance of juga 

here is obscure. Sh. has the same but adds dan Sungei Raya pun 
demikian juga 

269. perwira : MS perwira-nya. For perwira see note 14 a on 
hulubalang 

270. tiada terturut : Sh. has tiada boleb bertara , barang laku- 
nya tiada terturut oleh orang lain which is better 

271. cberdek dan perkasa : the MS adds jika ia bermain 

daripada orang lain 

272. jika ia memengkis : obviously out of place. Sh. puts 

the events in their right order with jika ia bergurau sama muda- 
muda , maka di-sengseng-nya tangan baju-nya, maka ia memengkis 
kata-nya . 

272 a . Tunggal : should read Tungkal y which is north-east of 
Jambi 

272b. segala raja-raja : the translation follows the MS which 
reads orang Pelembang dan Raja Inderagiri dan Raja Jambi dan 
Raja Tungkal dan Raja Lingga 

272 c . ferdana meiiteri : read paramenteri 

273. Daha : in East Java 

274. keris itu : the details of this story, whether in this text 
or in Sh., are far from clear. If keris itu is the keris ganja kerawang 
mentioned above, what happened to it when it was given to the 
Raja of Daha? Forty-one creeses in all are mentioned but only forty 
were stolen. And was the sheath of keris itu broken? We are not 
told that it was; but if it wasn't, why did it ever leave the Raja 
of Da ha’s keeping* to become available for presentation to the Raja 
of T.P.? 

274 a . perawangan: see note 42* referring to p.56, I.45 of text. 

275. di-tambat-nya: it is hardly likely that the Batara himself 
tied the dog there: Sh. adds maka segala hamba raja dudok di-bawab 
and it is evidently they who tied the dog 

276. pcdikir : MS J3 which I read as pedekar , see W. 

under pendekar and cf. laku-nya saperti pedekar menari on p.160, 
L 16 

277. pelbagai laku-nya: after these words the MS has q<£ Si 
and the sentence should read di-gertak-nya perisai-nya 

( kapada ) anjing itu . as in Sh.? 

278. Mari kita . larangan ini : Sh. adds pertinently ada-kah 

kita di-turunkan orang atau tidakf 

279. tetak-nya : should read di-tetak-nya 

280. gempar: another of the words occurring constantly in the 
S.M. for which it i$ hard to'find any one English equivalent suitable 
in every instance. E.g. in orang pun gempar babis berlarian sana sini 
on p.m, I.29 ‘p a m<f possible as a rendering: but 'panic’ will not do 
here nor in Jika ia ka-paseban , di-paseban gempar on page 106, II9-10. 
"Excitement” is perhaps the nearest English equivalent. Cf. Hkt. R.R. 

Pasai, p.6. I.24 di-suroh-nya gemparkan . kerbau jdlang itu 'he 

ordered his men to stampede the wild bufflaloes’ 

These notes refer to pages 104—106 of Winstedt’s romanized text: see 
footnote on p. 205 antea. 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 








translated by C. C. Brown 


229 


281. orang pasar pun gempar : should read orang di-pasar pun 
gempar and then should go on dan jika ia pergi pada kampong 
orang, maka segala orang di-kampong itu gempar: segald Jawa itu pun 
hairan memandang laku-nya as in the MS. The sentence dan segala 
perempuan Jawa....Hang Tuah itu is not in the MS. 

282. mengintai : MS menenggok dia 

283. Onya suruh .: for this and the other passages in Java¬ 

nese which follow, see APPENDIX A 

284. menyuroh orang berjaga-jaga: I suspect the text. In pre¬ 
vious instances (on pp. 58, 73 and 78) the expression is ( baginda ) 
memula-i perkerjaan berjaga-jaga , and I fancy menyuroh orang here 
refers to the music mentioned in the next sentence, especially as 
according to the MS that sente’nce runs Maka segala bunyubunyian 

pun berbunyulah . gendir . madali : impossible tc translate for 

lack of Engliish equivalents 

285. sapu-sapu ringin : see P.M.S., Life and Customs, Pt. 3, 
Malay Amusements, p.77. The playing of this game was evidently 
suggested with a view to annoying the Javanese as it involved 
stretching out the legs (berlunjur): the result appears in H.36-7 below. 

285 a . beranjur : should read belunjur ? 

286. di-larang kata-nya . Batara : Dr. Hooikaas conjec¬ 
tures tantapi dak tempiiing kau sirno ‘.? I will give you such 

a box on the ear as will destroy you’ Tantapi cannot be identified. 

287. gila-kah kami : elliptic. "Should we haie dared to play? 
We are not mad!” Sh. has bera?ii-kah kami. Cf. gila apa-kab patek 
menaroh dia? on p.112, I.32 (note 309). 

Biar-nya bermain: Sh. biar dia bermain. The use of nya here for 
dia is characteristic of the Malay of Kelantan and Trengganu 

288. hadlir mengadap: the MS adds Sidtan Mansur Shah pun 
ada hadlir. 

288 a . Pada Sultan Mansur Shah: the MS has pada Tun 
Bijaya Sura 

289. keris Batara: according to Sh. the royal betel-bearer wore 
a royal creese and it was that creese that Tun Bijaya Sura managed 
to filch, not the Batara’s own creese carried by the betel-bearer as 
suggested by this text 

290. Maka Utah: preceded in the MS by Maka Tun Bijaya 
Sura pun di-panggil oleh Batara 

290 a . menjadi <jT>* : MS menjawat dia 

290 b . mohonkan Inderagiri : the MS adds kapada Batara 
Majapahit 

291. di-alpa: MS Leyden translates ‘if you give it, is 
well (dalap)': but no such word as dalap or di-alap can be traced 
and di-alpa , a verb formed from alpa ‘negligent, makes no sense. 
The meaning is obviously the same as that of diqqad in I.38 below, 
?‘it is weir 

292. Kita anugerahkan: this ‘gift' seems to have had disastrous 
consequences for the ruler of Indragiri (Maharaja Merlang, says 
Sh., tiada di-beri kembali and he died in Malacca, see p. 164, I.33, 
while his son Raja Nara Singa only succeeded in returning by ‘making 
his escape', see p.165, l.io) and for the retinue who accompanied 

These notes refer to pages 106—110 of Winstedt's romanized text: see 
footnote on p. 205 antea. 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 








230 The Malay Annals (Translator's Commentary) 

him, see p. 130 , 1.6 membawa orang Inderagiri akan menebas jalan 
and, the opening paragraph of ch. XVIII on p .164 

293. jangankan _: should read jangankan ... .Inderagiri ini , 

segala . Jawa itu pun siapa - tab empunya dia jikalau tiada - 

Malaka? 

294. yang bergelar : i.e. subsequently, see p. 197 , I .40 

295. Ratu di-Kelang : Sh. Radin Kelav.g and Sultan Mansur 
on his deathbed speaks of him as anak kita 1 Raja Radin y see p.i 37 ^ 
I14 

296. menurun: MS menuruni. It appears that menuruni dia 
means dower himself.’ 

297. maka orang-lah : MS which is untrace- 

able. Sh. di-tarek 

298. demam : Sh. pertinently adds terkokol-kokol ‘had shiver¬ 
ing fits’: seme such word i 3 needed to explain why the ‘young men 
laughed at him’. 

299. Sa-telah didihat . ..di-usir-nya: represents, it would 

seem, Sa-teiah H. Tuah di-lihat oleh Jawa itu y maka oleh Jawa itu 
lain di-usir-nya 

300. berkendak: acc to Sh. this was only a canard, di-kata- 

kan ia berkendak ; and Leyden translates ‘he was wrongfully 
accused of having seduced.' 

301. di-suroh bunch: because he had by his conduct polluted 
the palace, as Hang Kasturi was to do subsquently? 

302. Sa-telah sa-tahun : should read Sa-telah sudah sa-tahun 

303. bantal tilam : MS ^ y (batil talam). Batak (d&l) 
a copying error for JjL (batil) 

304. di-atas talam . ia berjalan: according to Hang Tuah 

III, 98 , to prevent himself being stabbed from underneath through 
the floor 

305. kendak-nya . .di-belah-nya: Sh. kendak-nya itu pun di- 
bunoh-nya y di-biris-nya .... Probably di-bunoh-na has been omitted 
by error here, cf. di-lihat .... su dab di-bunoh-nya on p. 113 , I .37 

306. mengenang: W. paraphrases Sh. Sultan MS. pun menge- 
nang-ngenang Laksamana as ‘a Sultan mourning a dead chief.’ But 
Malays frequently use terkenangkan with the meaning ‘mention’ 
without any implication of regret and the words that follow in I .27 
suggest that mengenang here means ‘speak of rather than ‘think of.’ 
cf. terkenang on p. 204 , I .39 

307. Sayang-nya si-Tuah tiada: ‘it is sad that Tuah is no 

more’; not ‘is not here’: Sultan Mansur believed him to be, dead 

308. Sa-telah....: preceded in the MS by Maka Seri Nara 
‘ diraja diam menengar titah itu and I have translated accordingly 

309. gila apa-kah: cf. gila-kah kami on p. 108 , I .39 (note 287). 

310. saperti bukit: Sh. saperti Bukit K.af 

310 a . tetapi : makes no sense. ? an error for tatkala which 
Sh. has 

311. oleh patek-patek: Sh. sebab itu-lah maka patek taroh 

pada dusun } patek pasong. Evidently the indention was to write 

These notes refer to pages 110—113 of Winstedt’s romanized text: see 
footnote on p. 205 antea . 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 










translated by C. C. Brown 231 

■something similar here, ? maka oleh ( itu) patek (taroh pada dusun) 
patek pasong 

312. yang sempurna, bamba : Sh. hamba yang sempurna. Cf. 
Tuan hamba (? hamba) yang sempurna on p. 121 , I .12 (note 365). 

313. memanggil : ? mengambil as in Sh. 

314. teranggar-angg.ar: ? teranggau-anggau 

315. Sa-telah datang : Sh. adds di-anugerahi baginda ayapan 
315 a . Ad.a-kah : MS ada-lah 'So you are still alive' 

315 b . maka : = sebab itu, cf. ku-sangka be rani Seri Bija 

1 diraja, maka aku mau naik perahu-nya oru p .146 I .44 and see R.O.W. 
Malay Grammar, p. 161 , ( 4 ), II. See also note on maka tiada tahu 
referring to p. 144 , l.i and cf. p. 220 , I .7 

316. hanya kit,a bertemu : in other words, a nous deux mainte- 
nant ! 

317. Jikaiau engkau: preceded in the MS by Bagaimana aku 

akan naikf Baharu dua tiga kali (?) (MS ) mata tangga 

-engkau terpa aku and I have translated 'accordingly 

318. termasa: see note 29. 

319. Di-mana pula demikian : the English slang “nothing doing!" 

320. Maka Hang Tuah : either there is an omission here of 
somq such words as pun naik-lah or there should be no comma after 
Tuah and the second Hang Tuah :in this, sentence should go out 

321. berotar-otar : the same word as utar in I .32 (where Sh. 
has utar-utar) 

322. : so the MS, but surely as in Sh. 

was intended? 

323. Muga-muga : see note 30. 

324. Sa-telah Hang Kasturi mati : after these words Sh. has 
maka Hang Tuah pun turun-lah dari istana itu mengadap Sultan 
M.S., thus supplying an evident omission in this text 

325. pakaian yang di-pakai baginda : it looks as though this 
was the 'special mark of favour' mentioned in note on di-persalini 
on p .43 

326. segala anak isteri-nya: I conjecture that what was in¬ 
tended here was 

segala anak isteri-nya , habis ( di-bunoh rumah-nya pun) di- 
rombak (?), datang-kan tanah kaki tiang-nya pun . 

327. Seri Nara ' diraja : should read as in Sh., Seri Bija 
4 diraja , see I. 25 * 

328. ‘adat dahulu kala: see p. 85 , I .18 

329. sendiri : ? an error for (mengadapi dia) 

which Sh. has 

329 a . besar istana itu . di-sirap : for the translation of this 

highly technical and difficult passage I am indebted to R.O.W. 
329 b . kemunchak-nya : the MS adds pun tujoh 
329 c . antara : MS segala 
329 d . siapa-siapa : read sayap-sayap 

These notes refer to pages 113—114 of Winstedt’s romanized text: see 
footnote on p. 205 antea . 

J952] Royal Asiatic Society . 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 






232 The Malay Annals (Translated Commentary) 


329 e . tingkap : MS ? tongkop 'spire' 

330. rumah : Sh. istana, evidently right 

331. melibat : MS c^lo read di-lihat 

331®. raja-raja : as Sh., but surely it should be hamba raja as 
in I. 7 ? 

331 b . asal sida-sida : confutes W.'s definition of sida-sida as 
'court eunuchs" 

332. sa-jengkal : should be sa-jengkal tiga jari , cf. p .114 

332 a . Afafoz segala raja-raja dalam is tana : evidently the copy¬ 
ist has nodded here. ? he meant to write Maka segala harta raja 
( tinggal) dalam istana. For an intelligible version of this corrupt 

passage see Sh. XVI, pp. 115-6 

333. dapat selat : MS It is evident from the context 

that this must stand for something to wear , and despite the spell¬ 
ing I think ol— j>' must represent bersalut , i.e. keris bersalut (see 

W. under salut. Cf. Sh. XV (p. 190 ) where the reward given to 
Nakhoda Saidi Ahmad (this text p. 173 , I. 29 ) is described as di- 

anugerahi persalin _ keris bersalut dan pedang berikat mas . That 

passage suggests that pedang here = pedang berikat mas 

334. Maka orang Ungaran . kota orang (I. 18 ) : I con¬ 

jecture the following reading (words in square brackets are in the 
MS but omitted in the text) 

Maka orang Unguran [dan orang Tungal ] buat istana serta- 
nya orang Pancbur Serapong berbuat balairuang; bdlai men - 
dapa orang Suir berbuat dia; balai apit pintu yang dari kanan 

orang Sudar buat dia; balai apit pintu yang di-kiri itu orang 

Sayong berbuat dia; (? balai) gendang orang Apong berbuat dia; 
dan gajah (? menyusu) orang Merba berbuat dia; penanggahan 
orang Sawang berbuat dia; dan pemandian orang^ Tungkal berbuat 
dia; dan masjid orang Tentai bebuat dia; pintu pagar istana 

orang Muda berbuat dia; dan kola orang .? (? berbuat dia). 

[Ada pun istana itu baik pula daripada dabulu. Sa-telah sudab- 
lah sakalian-nya itu , maka Sultan Mansur Sbab\ pun me-anugerabi 
segala orang yang berkerja itu. Maka baginda pun diam-lab di - 
istana babaru , karar-lab sa-lama-lama-nyaA and I have 
translated accordingly 

335. beranak dengan Tun Kudu : thus realising the expecta¬ 

tions foreshadowed on p. 96 , I .22 ! 

336. Tun Tahir : became Sri Nara 'diraja, p .122 

337. Tun Mutabir : became Bendahara Sri Maharaja, 'the 
grandest of all the Bendaharas', pp. 159—60 

338. Tun ' Abdul......terlalu olaban: for details see p. 122 , 

I .20 et sqq. 

339. Tun Naja: married Sultan AlaVd-din, p .139 

340. bingkis-nya jarum : lest it should be thought that the 
Raja of China was underestimating the importance of the Raja 
of Malacca, Sh. adds lain daripada itu sutera benang mas kamkba 
dewangga dengan beberapa benda yang gbarib and for kapada in 
I .35 below substitutes ka-atas mabkota ! 

These notes refer to pages 114—116 of Winstedt’s romanized text: see 
footnote on p. 205 antea. 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 







233 


translated by C. C. Brown 

341. gagak: evidently there is an omission here. Sh. has maka 
datang gagak suatu kawan, tiada terhisabkan banyak-nya 

341a. turun masok : read turut masok 

342. berbunyi-lah guroh : the Emperor of China was Raja 
langit, (see R.O.W., Malay Magician, p. 36 ) 

343. sa-orang orang: MS sa-orang sa-orang: Sh. has, more 
correctly, sa-orang sa-biji 

344. istimewa aku pula : so Sh., but the MS has the more 
usual istimewa pula aku 

345. Barang siapa: Sh. has, more probably, barang siapa 

menteri China 

346. kahadapan . makan-lah : so the MS, but what was in¬ 

tended, I think, was 

ka-hadapan Tun P. P., maka Tun P. P. dengan segala orang 
Melayu pun semua-nya makan-lah 

347. Ling : referred to subsequently as Hang Liu 

348. anak putera : ? anak menteri , cf. - paramenteri 

on p. 102 . I .20 

349. menghantarkan anakanda baginda : the MS adds Puteri 
Hang Liu itu dan beberapa ratus dayang-dayang yang baik rupa- 
nya serta anakanda baginda itu. I have translated accordingly. 

349a. di-suroh baginda: according to Sh. the Sultan himself 
went out to meet her. 

349 b . melihat: Sh. melihat paras . Evidently rupa or paras 
has been omitted here by error: cf. melihat rupa puteri on p. 45 , 

I. 13 

350. menteri China yang lima ratus itu: if these are the 

lima ratus dnak putera (? menteri) yang muda-muda jn hi 2 
above, menteri here should be anak menteri as in Sh.? 

351. menteri: must be the menteri yang terbesar of 11. 12—3 
above 

352. Tun Telanai dan Menteri Jana Putera: previously 
sent as envoys to Siam, p. 98 . For the title Tun Telanai see p .214 

II. 14—15. 

353. Berkirim sembah-kah: see note on surat sembah on 

p .93 

354. menycrang Pahang: according to Sh. it was because 
Sultan Mansur had heard such favourable accounts of Pahang, its 
mineral wealth, fauna etc. that 'he greatly desired to possess it/ 

355. Berapa lama-nya berperang . dengan mudah-nya: 

these two statements do not go well together unless it was the 
writer’s intention to describe a sudden turn of fortune, in which 
case one would have expected muga-muga instead of maka before 
dengan ( takdir ), as at the foot of p. 99 . Sh. omits the former state¬ 
ment. 

356. serta: the MS has^-*— as on p. 130 , I. 26 , see note there¬ 
on Again on p. 149 , I .3 what appears in the text as sambi(l) is 

written as <s5 --— in the MS. A misspelling of sambil can hardly 

These notes refer to pages 117 — 119 of Winstedt’s romanized text: see 
footnote on p. 205 antea . 

1 952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 






234 The Malay Annals (Translated Commentary) 

have occurred in all three cases and it looks as though there was- 
a word sambi (? sembi) now obsolete with the same meaning as 
sambil 

357. Kira-kira : $h. has karna M.DS. ini sudah aku kira-kirakan 
7iama-nya dubawab nama-ku. ? a reference to the system of divina¬ 
tion described by Skeat, Malay Magic, p .559 

358. Maharaja Sura minta nasi : MS ia minta nasi Maharaja Sura 
which is better, as it clear from what follows that he must have 
mentioned his name. Sh. has M.D.S. pun menyuroh minta nasi:. 
the messenger would probably have asked for rice ‘'for the M.D.S/’ 

359. Jikalau ketahuan :? repunctuate thus Jikalau ketahuan ia 

ada di-rumah-ku, apa hal-kitf Demikian ini , baik-lah . 

360. Seri Bija ‘diraja pun...: the facts are presented here in 
the wrong order and there are evidently some omissions in the MS 
After comparing Sh. 1 suggest the following reconstruction of the 
passage 

Maka S.B. ‘diraja pun di-titahkan oleh Sultan MS. diam di- 
Pahang, di-anugerahi gendarqg nobat serunai nafiri melainkan 
negdra juga yang tiada , Id an di-anugerahi 'payomg iram-iram 
berapit oleh jasa-nya menangkap M.S. itu. Maka S. 'diraja 

pun pergi-lah ka-Pahang dan apabila ia keluar dari Malaka , 
lepas Pulau Besar, make S . B. ‘diraja pun bernobat-lah. Telah 
sampai ka-Pahang y maka iahlah memerentah-vian Pahang itu 

I have tried in the translation, by means of interpolations in 
brackets, to bring out the true meaning 

361. keluar dari Malaka : he could not have his ruler’s drum 
beaten within earshot of Sultan Mansur, cf. sa-hingga tiada-lah 

kedengaran nobat .of Sultan ‘Abdiu’l-Jamal of Pahang after 

he had abdicated in chagrin, p. 176 , 11 . 11—13 

362. di-nobat4ah : the MS has the odd y which is 

presumably an error for bernobat-lah. On p. 177 , I .20 what has 
has been romanized as nobaDlah appears in the MS as y ; 

this also looks like an error for y y (bernobat-lah) The S.M. 

has di-nobatkan frequently but not di-nobat. The meaning here 
is 'he had his royal drum beaten’ in exercise of his newly acquired 
privilege: see note 57 on nobat , and cf. baginda pun nobat-lab di- 
Kedah on p. 163 , I .35 

363. demikian juga: The MS adds perasaan hamba saperti 
dalam kerajaan juga. 

364. orang tua ini : Sh. Keling tua ini! 

365. tuan hamba yang sempurna: should read tuan hamba 

hamba yang sempurna. Cf. p. 112 , I .44 

366. Kata Seri Rama : we are not told that he said. Sh.. 
supplies the omission viz. Ada juga orang yang tahu di-dalam 
negeri ini , the suggestion clearly being that someone was casting 
a spell which prevented the re-capture of Kenchinchi. 

366 a . di-ambil orang-lah: i.e. Maharaja Sura did not himself 
capture the elephant but when he was released he withdrew the spell 
(see note 366 on I .24 above) 

These notes refer to pages 119-^122 of Winstedt’s romanized text: see 
footnote on p. 205 antea. 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vo]. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 






translated by C. C. Brown 235 

367. cheteria . betetapan : See note 14 a on bulubalang 

on p .45 l.i, and also p. 177 , I .23 

368. Tambaban ia sedia anak adek : not in Sh. and obscure. 
Can only mean ''Moreover they are already your children.” I take 
the words as merely a compliment to a great friend (see p. 96 , 
I .26 berkaseb saperti saudara sa-jalan jadi) 

368 a . e?npat orang membawa dia: i.e. each chest was a load 
for four men ? Sh. has lima buah chandu peti, dua-dua orang 
membawa dia 

368 b . nakara : a special mark of honour : contrast p. 120 , I .33 

369. pada berbiiang-buangkan .: I read this passage as 

follows 

pada berbuang-buangkan (kuku),tig.a hari maka sudah : jika 

berkuda , pada bayang-bayang panas: {pada) membaiki diri-nya r 

berpenanak; terlalu sa-kali olab-nya 
berpenanak : cf. berpenanak Sultan Mabmud Shah menanti di - 

pengkalan on p. 152 , i .45 and see R.O.W. Malay Grammar, sec. 51 

(3) 

369 a . Ya tuanku Cif y* : ? read Ya tuan-ku Seri Kopiah 7 
see W. under kopiah 

369 b . ayahanda . anakanda: evidently these words should 

be transposed 

369 c . Raja Ujong Tanab : Sh. raja Malaka. This is the first 
mention of Ujong Tanah in the S.M., but it appears again on p. 127 , 
1.9 evidently with a wider meaning than "Southern Johor” (W.), viz. 
to cover Malacca and all the territory to the south (? even inclu¬ 
ding Bentan, see p. 207 , 1.8 and note thereon). It appears to have 

this meaning on p. 217 , II .28 and 40 but to be used for Southern 

Jchor only on p. 217 , last line 

370. berkembar : so Sh. The MS has ? bersembir 

or merely a copyist's error for 

371. di-timpai-nya: MS ^ ? di-tumpabi-nya. On p. 147 , 

I .36 the same word occurs. Sh. here has di-tempob-nya 

372. Tun Bes.ar pun mati-lab : Sh. adds Maka gempar-lab 

anak buah Bendabara P.R., semua-nya keluar dengan alat 

senjata-nya. This explains the Bendahara’s question Apa-tab . 

berlengkap in this text in 1.6 below. 

373. berlengkap : one of the every few instances in the S.M. 
of berlengkap not meaning 'make* ready ships', see note 51. 

374. bendak derbaka-lab ka-bukit: i.e if you a-re going to turn 
against the Raja’s son {busut), you will be turning against the Raja 
himself ( bukit) 

375. Nyit : MS c~o : unidentifiable. Sh. cbeb 

376. ka-Pabang : i.e. from Pahang, see p. 120 , I .35 

377. Seri Nara *diraja : a copyist's error for Seri Bija ‘diraja 

378. Pasai , TIaru : see note 172. 

379. di-bachakan-nya sembab : as on p. 146 . 

380. sega\a negeri: Sh. adds pertinently di-tanah Mengkasar. 


These notes refer to pages 122—126 of Winstedt’s romanized text: see 
footnote on p. 205 antea. 

J952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 








236 The Malay Annals (Translated Commentary) 

380 a . Maka baginda : before this the MS has Sa-ielah Sultan 
Mansur Shah menengar khabar itu 

380^. hujan : appears in the MS as hujang y see Introduction, 
p. ii. 

381. Raja Kenayan : see note 234 on tiga orang. 

382. jika dek-at : the MS adds kelak 

383. bertumit : Sh. bertumat which cannot be identified 

384. tepis: better tetas (as in Sh.). He was now going to' do 
what the Laksamana had done on p. 126 , I .33 

385. batu tolak bara-nya: see W. under bahara. Sh. has suatu 
tolak bara-nya. The story is evidently a tribute to Semerluki’s 
strength, p. 126 , I .9 

386. Timbul-lah batu ini : see my Malay Sayings, p .187 (Shake 
off the dust of one’s feet) 

386 a . Maka pada tempa 1 t itu: should read Itu-lah maka tempat 
itu . For itu-lah maka see note 145 a . 

387. Satelah itu : evidently there is an omission in the MS 
here of a passage to explain the sending of M. Abu Bakar. Sh. XX 
supplies the omission. 

388. Durr Manhunt: see p .8 of this text and Sh. XX 

389. Maka di-suroh : should be Maka Durr Manhunt di-suroh 

as in Sh. 

390. Tuan Pematakan : Sh. has, ? more probably, Makhdum 
Patakan. The Pasai expert might well have been a makhdum , 
though neither Patakan nor Pematakan bears any resemblance to an 
Arabic name 

391. suatu mas’ilah: see R.O.W., The Malays, p. 38 

392. biduanda : see note 14 a on' hidubalang. 

392 a . dengan : here and on p. 128 , I .7 dengan may mean ‘slaved 
cf. Risalat Hukum Kanun sec. 128 suku barge 4 dengan itu 

393. bunyi surat itu: Sh. XX, p .128 gives the contents of the 
contents of the letter 

393 a . dengan ; see note 392 a , above. 

394. maka Tun Hasan .: the MS has maka Tun Hasan 

pun datang ka-rumah Tun Makdum Mua mengadap Tun Makdum 
Mua 

395. taban : see R.O.W., Preface to this text 

396. apa daya kita .. . .teranjur: the same expression occurs 
on p. 178 , 1.6 Sh. adds Malu hamba membaleki lagi 

397. ini-lah ia : for the probable answer see R.O.W., The 

Malays, p .38 

398. Kadli Yusuf: referred to on pp. 154 and 157 as Maulana 
Yusuf 

399. Makhdum Saiyid 1 AbduVl-A%iz: see p .84 (note 155 refers).. 

400. jenun : evidently not to be interpreted literally as 'mad’, 
as we read of him on p .157 as Sultan Mahmud’s teacher. It seems 
here to be used in the sense of 'retire from the world to practise 
religion’ 


These notes refer to pages 126—129 of Winstedt’s romanized text: see- 
footnote on p. 205 antea . 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & Ilf 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 





translated by C. C. Brown 


237 


401. Kadli Menua : referred to on p. 154 , 1 . 3*8 as Kadli Menawar 
Shah, grandson’ of Maulana (Kadli) Yusuf and, correctly, on p. 157 ,. 
1.24 as son. 

402. Yang mana : Sh. anak raja mana , which suggests that yang 
mana here, as commonly, means 'which one?. But cf. yang mana 

Utah . tiada patek lalui on p. 135 I .44 where yang mana clearly 

is not an interrogative and simply =r mana, as I think is the case here 

403. orang Inderagiri : see note 292. 

403 a . menyelampai : preceded in the MS by * : see note 
356 on serta. 

404. sa-tempayan: here and in the next line the MS has sa- 
tepayan, the medial m being omitted as is usual in the Malay of 
Kelantan and Trengganu. For sa-makok see Introduction. 

d ana h raja-raja: Sh. anak raja yang he mama 

Kaja Ahmad itu . The referece to anak kita on p. 131 , I .15 con¬ 

firms that for raja-raja here we should read raja 

406. Sahaya semua : the pronouns of the 1 st person singular 
most commonly used in the S.M. are hamba and beta , and sahaya 
here may be the noun 'servants’. But the S.M. has examples of 
sahaya being used as a pronoun, e.g. by the Laksamana himself on 
p. 180 , I. 39 : and I prefer to read it as a pronoun here 'let me and 
my men land, the L. tactfully absolving the Bendahara from the 
necessity of participating in the attack 

„ f 07 * segala - sa-daun : Sh. has makan-lah Bendahara dengan 

segala - sa-kahan-nya sa-daun. The omission of the Bendahara 

in this passage in this text must be an error, as the whole point of 
the story is that the Bendahara ate with the others whereas ordinari¬ 
ly he would eat by himself, see p. 163 , I .15 

408. gemurob .... menyabong: defective as it stands. It should 
read gemurob bunyi-nya ra’ayat ( berjalan itu), rupa ( sinar ) senjata 
saperti Mat sabong-menyabong and I have translated accordingly 

409. pecbah: Sh. pecliab perang-nya, habis lan . which is 
better. 

410. ambah-ambohkan tuah: Sh. amboh-ambohan tuah The MS 

h as °y which I read as embah-embahan tua 

'old though I may be’. See W. under emboh. Whether emboh- 
embahan (W.) should or should or should not be embah-embahan T 
in - Trengganu the word emboh (in negative ta emboh is pro¬ 
nounced as nearly embah ias emboh 

411. sa-orang : ? — sa-orang ku-kelupuri, from 

kelupur (mengelupar ) "send them sprawling” 

412. senjata-nya panah Pasai : thus the MS (the words maka... 
ra ayat have been imported from Sh.) Pasai is probably an error for 

as on p. 148 , I .40 where what appears in the text as perisai 
is written in the MS. This f may well be the 

same word as appears in the Hkt. R.R.P., p. 32 , kuda sembarani anak 
kuda Perasi. If, as is possible, sembarani is derived from the Per¬ 
sian sum ‘hoof and par 'wing’, i.e. 'having winged hoofs’), it is 
probable that Perasi there represents 'Persian’, particularly as 

These notes irefer to pages 130—132 of Winstedt’s romanized text: 
see footnote on page 205 antea . 


1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 





238 


The Malay Annals 

Persian horses were imported into the East for their size and 
strength? Equally ^^13 here may stand for ‘Persian’ ? These 

were evidently some special bows and may have come from Persia, 
famous for archery from the time of Herodotus, or at any rate may 
have been copied from a Persian model ? 

413. Baik-lah . lari itu : the MS has Baik-lah maka Naina 

Isahak pun pergi . The passage should read 

Maka kata T.P., "Balk-lab." Maka N.I . pun pergi mem - 

balekkan . lari itu y barang siapa bertemu . 

.and I have translated accordingly 

414. merapat : merapah (MS ) 

415. di-seru : MS — di-suarj 

416. berhulu : : berhulu indong ( mutiara) 

417. akhir zaman : ‘of the latter days’ i. e. of the present 

time. In the Malay of Kelantan dunia akbir zanian = nowadays’ 

418. oleh si gala . alah-lab : the text is evidently corrupt; 

some verb is missing after segala crang Malaka. The sense of the 
passage is given by Sh. Maka oleh segala orang Malaka di-gulong- 
nya sa-kalj-sa-kali: maka negeri Pasai pun alah-lab , oleh orang 
Malaka di-masoki-nya dari pintu Tenai. Maka istana pun dapat: 
maka Sultan Pasai pun lari ka-butan 

419. Yang di-sembab : the epigram can hardly be reproduced 
in English. The meaning is “When I was in Malacca I did homage 
to him whose suzerainty I recognized there. Now that I am in 
Pasai I recognize -no such suzerainty:” and it was so interpreted by 
the Bendahara, see II. 35—6 below. 

419 a . Maka sangat-lah : MS Maka makin sangat-lah 

420. kata sa-tengah: sc. orang; ‘some people say’ 

421. perdana menteri : ? read paramenteri 

422. tujoh buah gunong : cf. the description of Bija Nagara 
on p. 51 

423. sa-penyampang: not known to W. or M. ? an error for 
sa-penampang as Sh., see W. undef tampang III, and as on p. 181 , l.i 

424. mengadap ka-Majapahit : the MS adds Sa-telah sudah 

lengkap, maka baginda pun berangkat-lah ka-Majapahit 

425. jikalau, tiada mati : not to be taken literally. An example 
of what Malays call melapek chakap i.e. making no statement about 
their future intentions without some s-uch proviso as kalau tiada 
apa-apa ‘aral gendala-nya; kalau ‘ umor panjang etc. 

426. papart perahu : is this an allusion to the practice described 
ini R.O.W., History of Malaya, p. 57 ? 

427. Kujai : ? Kuchi, the word always used on the East Coast 
cf Malaya for Indo-China 

428. Champa Malaka : see note on Nakhoda Chempa on p. 85 . 
See also Marrison, The Chams of Malacca ( ]MBRAS y 24 , pt. 1 ) 

429. Raja Radin: Sh. Raja Hussain . Sultan Mansur had a 
son to whom he gave the name Ratu di-Kelang (p.m, I. 13 ), Sh. 
Radin Kelang. According t Q Sh. XXIII. p .139 Radin Kelang was 
killed in an affray. Sh. (XIV) says Raja Husain was Sultan Mansur’s 
son by a sister of Bendahara Paduka Raja and married ‘Tun Senaja 

These notes refer to pages 133—136 of Winstedt’s remanized text, 
see footnote on page 2(05 ante a. 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 








translated by C. C. Brown 


239 


sister of Tun Tahir’. This must be the Tun Naja mentioned on 
p. 116 of this text and again on p. 139 , I .33 as the wife of Sultan 
Ala’ud-din. The Raja Radin mentioned here must accordingly be 
Raja Husain „ 

430. tetapi jangan di-beri Allah .: would be better 

punctuated 

tetcpi — jangan di-beri Allah ta’ala demikian itu — jikalau 

kira-nya . 

431. gering-lah : the story that follows is told in Sh. (XXVI) 
of Sultan Mahmud 

432. Mengapa: so Sh., but the MS has mengadap which also 
makes good sense, being used here, as commonly, of attendance at 
the bedside of a person in extremis 

433. Shahid-lah : here used in the sense of “behold ! ”, cT 
Shahid-lah y Seri Nar.a ' diraja membcwa bamba lari on p. 212 , 1.19 

434. Maka sembah....: MS ini-lab . The passage should read 
Maka sembah Bend, dan Laks ., u Sa-kali ini-lab Melayn 
durhaka 

434a. Bendahara : read Bendahari 

434 b. habis : MS ? hapus 'erased' 

435. berusong . mengiringkan dia: I would omit the 

words in brackets, which have been interpolated, and read anak 
buab-nya . dia as part of the royal order 

436. jika ia berusong,an: I take this ia to be the affirmative 
ya , not the pronoun: 'if you do use the litter’. The remark is addressed 
to the Bendaha-ra and there is no obvious reason why he should 
be apostrophized as 'he’ 

437. Aku-kab pa’ si-bendtd : the argument here seems to be: 
‘if I use my litter as the Laks. uses his, 1 am likely to be mistaken, 
by the man in the street, for the Raja himself (and my loyalty 
will accordingly be suspect)’ 

438. aku-kctih pa’ si-bendul: the argument here seems to be: 

‘the Laks. is a fighting man. Therefore I give him any good 
weapon or (fighting) ship that comes into my hands: and when 
the time comes for such things to be used, he will employ them 
well to protect you and me as well as the Raja. You are not 

fighting men. Ask me for elephants or horses if you like, but 
don’t complain if I give weapons and boats to the man who can 
make best use of them’ 

439. Tun Naja: see note on Raja Radin on p. 137 

440. raja : better anak raja Pahang as Sh. 

441. Raja Mahmud: not previously mentioned, but accord¬ 
ing to Sh. he was a son by Tun Naja. Subsequently became Sultan 
Mahmud (p. 1510 ), though on pp. 149 —so he is referred to as Raja 
Mam at . ? the Sultan Ahmad in I .35 above 

442. di-buka-nya: so the MS but surely it must be an error 
for di-buangkan-nya? Sh. has di-champak-kan-nya 

443. hujong jambatan: ‘the entrance to the bridge’, see note 
on hujong pasar on p. 81 , I .18 

444. sa-orang orang siapa: ‘one of whose men’. The Sultan 
knew that only one man had done the killing 

445. Maka Hang Ishak dan Hang Siak: sc. pun datang-lab 

These notes refer to pages 137—141 of Winstedt’s romanized text: 
see footnote on page 205 antea. 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society . 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 









240 


The Malay Annals 


446. penengar-mu : Sh. memandang . The sense of penegar 

here is 'here of. 

447. menjerit : suggests that orang kedai was a woman 

448. tiada apa behina : 'of no great account’, see W. under bena 

448 a . Seri Maharaja : in his capacity as Temenggong (p. 122 , 

1139). For Jthe functions of the Temeiqgga|ng see R.O.W., The 
Malays, p .73 

449. anak harimaur . daging: one of the few Quotations of 

proverbial sayings to be found 1 in the S.M. Others are perut panjang 
sa-jengkal (p. 145 , l.i), mulut di-suap pisang (p .175 I .18 ular berbelit - 
belit sendiri-nya (p. 176 , L 8 ), kachang di-rendang (p. 191 , I. 16 ); langit 
menimpa bumi (p. 193 , I. 38 ) and (Sh.) orang mengantok di-sorong 
bantal (see note on kabul-lah on p. 186 , I. 40 ) 

449 a . kelak di-tangkap nya : the Sri Majharaja, as Bendahara, 
was put to death by Raja Mahmud, as Sultan Mahmud, see p .187 

450. Telanai Terengganu : for Telanai see note on p .214 
135, 1.4 

451. ibu : the principal player or 'leader’ in a game. For 
sepak raga see P.M.S., Life and Customs, pt.III, p .15 

452. berpenanak... di-atas: cf. the Perak expression in such 
•circumstances entah busok raga di-atas! 

453. di-tunjokkan-nya : evidently an error on the part of the 
copyist for di~berikan-nya f which Sh. has 

454. tahu : sc. Raja Maluku 

455. beladau : evidently the pedang variety (see W.) as on p. 
135, 1.4. 

456. nyiut dudok umbi : explained to me as a palm not actually 
in fruit but big enough to bear 

457. tiada memberi tahu baginda : Trengganu being part of 
Sultan Muhammad’s territory, see p. 125 , I. 30 , the latter evidently 
took the Telanaji’s action as Use majeste. For a similar charge of 
lese majeste see p. 143 , I .37 

458. sama-nya. this idiom, not noted by W., occurs 
passim in the Risalat Hukum Kanun, e.g. jikalau hamba orang me- 
nampar sama-nya hamba orang in sec 8 . For a similar incident see 
p. 224 , I .37 

459. kakanda : Sultan Muhd. of Pahang and Sultan Ala’u’d-din 
of Malacca were brothers though by different mothers 

460. jikalau : here as in other instances = apabila. Cf. jikalau 
Tun Perak kelak datang mengadap on p. 94 , 1.8 

460 a . lengkap : ? an error engkau as in Sh. 

461. <{ tuan juga” : read “ tuan ” juga. Another example of this 
Pahang practice will be found on p. 181 I .5 

462. ka-pintu luar: cf. p. 85 , I .29 et sqq. 

463. di-deramkan : read di-derumkan 

464. Sultan Ibrahim : see p .124 

465. ( adat Raja Pahang : as oq p. 142 , II. 34—6 

466. mengiring : has the meaning of the word which Malays 
pronounce mengereng 'turn sideways’ or in this instance practically 
as we should say 'turn one’s back on’, i.e. a gross discourtesy, which 
was delibrate, to Sultan Ibrahim. The word is used again on p. 208 , I. 5 , 


These notes refer to pages 141—143 of Winstedt’s romanized text: 
see footnote on page 205 antea. 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 






translated by C. C. Brown 


241 


though in that case the discourtesy was not intentional. (R.O.W. 
thinks it is the same word as mengiring 'follow’: I am doubtful. The 
pronunciation is quite different) 

466 a . tangan-nya kiri : a deliberate insult, see Zainal-’Abidin op. 
cit. supra, p .73 

467. tiada berbudi: cf. budi tuan bamba kurang on p. 121 , I .5 

468. maka tiada tabu: 'that you do not know’ ‘not to know’; 

a common use of maka in the S.M. (which has survived in the collo¬ 
quial Malay of Kelantan to this day), cf. ku sangka engkau sudah 

matiy maka aku mau membuat .cn p. 113 , 1 , 14 : also p. 66 , last 

line and p. 220 , L 4 . See also note on p.ioo, l.i 

469. di-bawa-lah : ? sc. ka-dalam 

470. dunia : Sh: dunia itu. This can only 

1 think, be an error for ^ I , cf. dunia ini tiada akan kekal on 

p. 150 , l.i Cf. also di-bawa masok dabulu on p. 220 , 1 . 

11 , where ini woulcj make good sense 

471. bukama karna : read bukama babwa 

472. raja-raja : Sh. raja which surely must be right 

473. dua permata : this injunction is addressed to the Benda- 
hara’s own people and the argument is 'you should, do your duty to 
the Raja because he (a) is joined with the Prophet like two stones 
in the same ring (b) is God’s deputy’ 

474. Seri Nara ' diraja : Sh. has Seri Maharaja and makes no 
mention of the Seri Nara 'diraja: rightly. 

475. bapa saudara Raja: S. M. Mutahir was the uncle of 
Sultan Mahrmud, his sister Tun Naja having married Sultan Mah¬ 
mud’s father, p. 139 

476. tiada berkerja Raja : see note on tiada kena kerja raja on 

p. 93 , 1.21 r 

477. perut panjang sa-jengkal: a proverbial expression for the 
'small appetite’ a disappointed man might be expected to have. See 
note on anak barimau on p .140 

478. kafi : Ar. 'sufficient’ 

479. saf sarap: ? error in the MS for sampab sarap as in Sh. 

480. samata patek harap: Sh. samata-mata patek badapi which 

seems preferable at first sight: but cf. negeri akbirat-lab _ kebendak- 

ku on p. 137 , I .12 

481. dudok pada jumlab Melayu : lit: amongst Malays 

482. dari perbata: ? Sh. reads daripada batu hilir di¬ 

kata huluy batu hulu di-kata hilir 

483. Raja Pablawan: the title of the Chief Minister of Haru, 
see p. 214 , I .30 

484. Lain surat 7 lain bacba-nya : cf. the incident related on 
p. 178 , I .36 et sqq. 

485. ia talm akan sa-buah sa-patab: ? a copyist’s error for ia 
akan tabu sebut sa-patab 'they shall know how to say a word rightly’ 

486. bulubalang Pasai : ? should read bulubalang-nya or simply 
Imlubalang as in Sh.? Pasai of course is art error 

487. Malaka : ? because Pasai was on friendly terms with 

Malacca 


These notes refer to pages 143—145 of Winstedt’s romanized text: 
see footnote on page 205 antea . 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society . 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 





242 


The Malay Annals 


488. lalu-lah ka- : could this be timbaan = timba 

ruangf 

489. jambatan : Sh. kurong 

490. segala: ? read sa-kali and the whole sentence as lain di- 
naiki-nya sa-kali perahu orang Haru, itu pun alab. Evidently Perahu 
orang Haru = perahu sendiri in 1.3 

491. Jikalau aku....: evidently an echo of H. R. Pasai, p. 338 

jika Fasai sa-Pasai-nya . jika Keling sa-Keliling-nya tiada dapat 

melawan aku f but badly quoted in that there should be a jika be¬ 
fore Malaka and the apodosis has been omitted 

gajab-ku : ? si-Betong 

492. farat: MS Farat cannot be identified. Parit is pos¬ 
sible but prosaic. Can be an error for (kudrat) 

which Sh. has (jika tiada dengan kudrat Allah melintang)? The 
sense then would be ‘only the power of God shall prevent me (storm¬ 
ing the fort of Malacca)' 

493. terlari-lan: should read terJalu lari 

494. hudu ... d^uful: it is suggested to me by a Tamil Scholar 
that these wards are mere tribe names. They are not otherwise 
identifiable 

495. di-timpahi-nya : see note on di-timpai-nya on p. 128 

496. Tun Kudu : a woman’s name, see p. 96 . Sh. Tun Kerutup 

497. ketiga-nya : Sh. ada .anak-nya laki-laki dua orang , sa- 
orang perempuan . Evidently laki-laki has been omitted in error 
in the MS after dua orang in 1.2 and after ketiga-nya there should 
have been mention of the daughter 

497 a . Kampar : on the East Coast of Central Sumatra. Referred 
to in Perak as Kampar Luar 

498. daripada sangat tempo!?: these words generally precede, 
e.g. daripada sangat tempo!? hidubalang Pasai y maka raay at 
Malaka pun pechah on p. 132 , I. 32 ; and I would read this passage 
thus:— 

. darah pun mengalir di-bumi . (Maka) daripada sangat 

tempoh orang Malaka kapada orang Kampar (maka orang Kampar 
pun undur-lah) 
as in Sh. 

499. tempek : read tampil 

500. pad'a orang Malaka : the MS adds ^ ? di-arong-nya 

‘wading’ (through blood) 

501. pula: ? read menempoh pula 

502. jika di-gagahi: should read jika di-gagahi juga hendak di- 

ambily lembing . sinda persembahkan. For a similar figure of 

speech cf. Seri Rama, p .227 

503. panah perisai: see note on senjatamya on p .132 

504. terus meleleh: Sh., conrectly, terus ka-sa-belah 

505. di-himpunkan-nya: ? di-hempaskan-nya as on p. 95 , l.i, 
‘they flung themselves inCo’ ? Sh. has di-masoki-nya 

506. Menawar Shah: see p. 139 , I .40 

507. Seri Amar ‘diraja akan Bendaharai-nya: see p. 197 , l.io 

508. Raja Mamat: see note on Raja Mahmud on p. 139 

These notes refer to pages 146—148 of Winstedt’s iromanized text: 
see footnote on page 205 antea. 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 







translated by C. C. Brown 243 

509. mengadap : ? 'look after’, as Bendahara sendiri mengadap (i) 
dia on p. 114 , I .28 

510. tetapi jangan duberi Allah : see note on the same words 
on p. 137 , which equally applies here 

511. patek semua-nya: cf. sahaya semua-nya on p. 172 , I .25 

512. sedia: spelt in the MS as on p. 81 , I .13 and p. 172 , 

1.2 

513. kebelaan : ? gembalaan to accord with the preceding 

mengembala. The omission of the m is paralleled on p. 76 , 1.2 

where what appears as gembala in the text is written in 

the MS 

514. ketuhaan-mu: Sh. tanah-mu. The MS has 

I suggest this is an error for Ketanahan-mu coined as a 

Malay equivalent of the Arabic tinu (clay) 

515. kerajaan : ? kerjakan 

516. pendua : secondary, reserve creese, smaller than the prin¬ 
cipal weapon. Such was Sultan Mahmud’s strength that for him a 
three-span creese was only a secondary weapon! 

517. Seri Bija diraja: according to Sh. he had only just 
arrived from Singapore (his fief, p. 151 , I. 30 ) His tiada beta mene- 
ngar umanat (I. 44 ) may well therefore have been literally true: but 
at the same time it signifies his disagreement with the succession of 
Sultan Mahmud to the throne, cf. the Laksamana’s sahaya belum 
menengar titah on p. 180 , I. 39 , and was so interpreted by Sultan 
Mahmud, see p. 151 , 1. 17 ; and also following note 

518. dalam hati baginda : Sh. pada hati baginda , “Tiada suka 
Seri Bija ‘diraja ini bertuankan aku.” Maka baginda berdendam .. 

519. Sultan Ahmad: succeeded to the throne on Sultan 
Mahmud’s abdication, p. 189 , only to be killed later on his father’s 
orders, p .193 

520. sa-orang: ? error for sedang as in Sh. 

521. di-ambil baginda sireh: see note on di-ambil . sireh 

puan on p. 94 , I .42 

521 a . Kena ... .mati: MS kena ubun-ubun , ubun-ubun-nya pesok 
lain mati 

522. Hendak-lah: read Ilendak 

523. apa kita: read apa daya kita 

524. tiga-belas tahil: Sh. barang dua tiga kati. The tahil of 
this text must have weighed considerably more than its present 
1 . 1/3 cz. : on p. 196 , 1.2 the weight of a champion game-cock is 
stated to be ten tahils ! 

524 a . Sidi: suirely sedia ? For the spelling see note on p. 81 , I .3 

524 b . Ka-majlis: did he however reappear in public life as the 
Tun Biajit mentioned on p. 195 , I. 16 ? 

525. chuchu: actually he was his son, see p. 129 , I .30 

526. Seri Awadana: presumably the Temenggong, Tun Mai 
Ulat Bulu, see p. 190 , I .28 

527. berajar pada Raja Maluku: see p .141 

528. Berapa batang.. tetak: would read better Berapa batang 
kehendak tuan hamba putus kisi-kisi ini hamba tetak? 

These notes refer to pages 149—155 of Winstedt’s romanized text: 
see footnote on page 205 antea. 

J952] Royal Asiatic Society . 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 





244 


The Malay Annals 

529. di-bawa-nya pula : i.e. under the influence of the spell put 
upon it by the Sriwa Raja 

530. ka-tempat-nya : MS ka-tambatan-nya 

531. Tun Isak Berakah : his methods with the Sriwa Raja are 
described on p .153 

532. Isak datang juga : one would expect Isak juga datang as 
in Sh. On p. 188 , I .43 there is the same discrepancy between the 
two texts over lamun suBaya^id di-ikat juga 

532 a . bersa-malaman: i.e. the spell cast on the pony which made 
it bring its rider back each time had beerf removed 

533. akan Tun 'Omar . Datok Bongkok : not clear as it 

stands. What I think was intended was 

akan Tun ‘Omar {yang) di-kasehi oleh Sultan Mahmud itu 

anak Seri Bija ‘diraja Datok Bongkok , terlalu be rani ( ia) . 

This Tun ‘Omar was the son of the Sri Bija ‘diraja who was known 
as Datok Bongkok, see p. 96 , II. 43—6 and p. 97 , II. 4—5 

534. guru-nya : for a description of a guru such as seems to 
be referred to here see Hang Tuah II, p. 161 

535. Hang ‘ Isa Pantas . Hang Husain Chengang : the descrip¬ 

tions that follow complete the portraits of the men mentioned 
on p. 152 , I .41 as Sultan Mahmud’s favourites 

536. anak tuan. ... sudah-lah : should read anak tuan {hamba) 

hendak sudah , sudah-lah , 

537. Maulana Yusuf _ Kadli Yusof : one and the same person 

See p. 129 , I. 29 , 

538. jenun : see note on p .129 

539. buangi ali-ali : ‘catapult them’ 

540. ka-rumah sama fakir : Sh. sama-nya fakir which is clearly 
right. 

541. pantas tangan : read pantas pangus 

542. berkain memanchong ; see R.O.W., English-Malay Dictio¬ 
nary, under skirt 'wearing the sarong caught up on right side and 
long on the left, with, one end hanging in front berkain mancbong\ 
which presumably = berkain memanchong . 

543. daripada hendak : ‘in order to’ 

544. di-bangun-nya : ? di-banguni-nya , cf. di-turuni-nya , p .160 

last line. Di-banguni-nya is perhaps stronger than dia bangun y ‘he 
got himself up’ as opposed to ‘he got up! 

544a. : ? berpasu ‘bowl after bowl’, cf. berpenanak on 

p. 152 , I. 42 . Sh. has sa-pasu 

545. pintu enggan : R.O.W. conjectures = pintu per-hinggaan 
corrupted into p.inggan ‘boundary gate’; but what about di-hadapan 
raja? My own view is that the text is corrupt and that there is a 
passage missing to the effect that Hang Berkat who publicly {di- 
hadapan raja) had been unwilling (enggan) to undertake the task of 
murdering Raja Z. A., was sent for privately by Sultan Mahmud and 
then volunteered (berchakap) . This view is corroborated to some 
extent by the Sh. version of the incident, see ch. xxx, p .194 

546. Maka titab Sultan M.S .according to Sh. he said to 

Hang Berkat jika sunggoh saperti kata-mu itu , enghau ku-aku saudara: 
and Sh. goes; on to relate how Hang Berkat murdered Raja Z. A. and 
for doing so was made Sang Sura (in which character he re-appears r 
graphically, on pp. 189—90 of this text) 

These notes refer to pages 155—158 of Winstedt’s romanized text: 
see footnote on page 205 antea. 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 








245 


translated by C. C. Brown 

547. _ patab-lab perang orang Kelantan : this invasion of 

Kelantan is described in Sh, XXVI 

548. merampas\ see note on rampasan on p. 48 . 

549. Paduka Tuan : this was the Tun Pikrama who was made 
Paduka Tuan on p. 134 , I. 30 ). As Tun Pikrama ho was bakal Ben da- 
bar a (p. 85 , l.io) and in the Sh. list of candidates for the Bendajhara- 
ship he is placed first 

550 Barang siapa patut : not in Sh. and obscure. Al,l nine were 
eligible' (patut), as Sultan Mahmud must have known. ? patut = 
terlebeb patut 

551. bonda Sultan Mahmud : Tun Naja (p. 139 , I. 33 ): she was a 
half-sister of Tun Mutahir, the Sri Maharaja 

552. karas Badan : the word karas is not known to W. or M. 
and it is not apparently of Portuguese origin. It appears also on 
p. 213 , I .21 and on p. 220 , I. 42 . The context in each case suggests that 
karas was some sort of chest, the upper tray of which housed a betel- 
set while the lower compartment was used for other valuables 

553. sikap-nya: ? sa-lenkap as in I .38 

554 . bekobak : I cannot trace kobak. Could stand for 

gobek 'betel-pounder' ? 

555 . tombak bertetampan : so Sh. A lance with tetampan 
("fringe” R.O.W.) attached to it 

556. terlalu sangat pada memelibarakan : so Sh., but it cannot 
be right. ? pada is copyist’s error for pandai. membawa orang : must 
be an error for membawa hati orang , which Sh. has 

556 a . Salamin : ? salimin , plural of salim (Ar.) and meaning 
'may we (arrive) safe’ ? Or is there a reference here to the 
Bandar Selimin mentioned in No. 953 of Pantun Melayu (W. and 
R.O.W.) ? 

557 . *adat temenggong : see p. 87 , I .28 

558. ganti ayab-nya : Tun Mutahir was made Temenggong on 
p. 122 , I .18 

559 . pedekar : see W. under pendekar 

560. melabohkan . tangan : in contrast to the short, tight¬ 

sleeved baju customary up to that time 

561. berpanya pada isteri-nya : as did the Sriwa Raja on p .153 

562. terlalu besar daripada _ lain : ‘grandest’, not 'greatest’: 

see p. 185 , l.i where the fact that he did, not know his own slaves by 
sight is considered a mark of his kebesaran 

563. tiadadah di-turuni-nya : following the precedent of the first 

Bendahara, see p. 62 , I. 7 . Sh. adds that he was seated di-atas. tikar 
pacbar, di-bawah tikar pachar itu di-bentangi permaidani. This was 
verging on royal practice, cf. p. 194 , 1.33 . 

564. Tun Sinai : becomes successively Tun Minda and Tun 
Menida (p. 162 I. 13 ) in the story that follows 

565. Inggeb: Jav. 'as you wish’ 

566. empat : Sh. empat puloh which must be right, see p. 162 , 

566 a . merugui : a case of panjat amgkara, see R.O.W., The 

Malays, p .45 , . , , 

567. Pateb Adam _ pecbab: for the Jav. version which has 

been included in the translation and for the rendering of it 1 am 
indebted to Drs. Hooykaas and Teeuw __ 

These notes refqr to pages 159—161 of Winstedt’s romanized text: 

see footnote on page 205 antea. 

J952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 





246 


The Malay Annals 


568. pun : MS pula , i.e. as other Rajas had done? 

568 a . mohonkan nobat : see note on nobat on p, 59 

569. Kama ‘adat .: cf. p. 87 , I. 34 . A notable exception was 

made on p. 132 , 11 . 1—12 

570. di-acharakan: see note on mengajari on p. 82 . See also 
note on bicbara on p. 185 , I. 15 . Evidently it was regarded as humi¬ 
liating to bo 'hauled up' before the Bendahara in this way, cf. the 
case of Tun Perak on p .95 and fee note on sa-bagai maria on that 
page. 

571. menteri: see p. 82 , I .30 

572. Lakukan sa-kah: Sh. supaya di-lalukan sa-kah i. e. 'that 
we may treat you as we treated your father’ ? Lakukan here may 
well be an error for lalukan 

573. Maharaja Merlang: see p. 82 , I .30 

574. itu pun: lit even so (itu pun) it was at was at Malacca 
that he died (instead of in Indragiri as might have been expected) 

575. anak Marhum Malaka : Puteri Bakal, d/o Sultan 
Mansur, p.lll, I .9 

575 a . di-upamakan : here = ‘respected’ ‘properly treated’, cf. 
Hang Tuah II 256 bunoh oleh kamu sebab ia tiada upama akan daku 
ini 

576. sudah di-anugerahkan: there is no record of this. See 
note on kita anugerahkan on p.no 

577. Maharaja Isak lari ka-Lingga : see p .197 I .13 

578. petuturan : see note on peraturan on p .42 

579. menghimpunkan: MS mengampongkan 

579 a . tuan: omit, as in Sh. 

580. melainkan _ tuiis: should, I think, read 

melainkan pulang ka-rumah kami-lah kelak , maka 
kami tuiis with maka = baharu , cf. tiga hari maka sudah on. p. 122 , 
I .21 

581. Sa-telah . Hang Nadim : I would re-punctuate thus 

Sa-telah sudah lengkap di-tulis-nya 7 kain . 

Hang Nadim 

582. Buah peler gerang : Sh. has Wdi peler geraiigan nama-nya 
which is preferable 

583. Ada pun sahaya: Sh. sahaya jangan di-masok-masokkan 
pada pekerjaan ini which is clearer 

584. Nadim , Nadim : MS Nadim , antum. The latter word is 
Ar. ‘ye’ 

585. segala arta-nya: Sh. serta harta ada sadikit-sadikit which 
is obviously the more correct version of what happened 

586. empat helai lepas: Sh., better banyd empat helai. yang 
lepas 

587. Datok Bongkok : see p. 96 , I 45 et sqq. 

588. Tun Bayajit: see p.i 54 > l- 1 3 

589. Guna : should be Sang Guna ( bakal Laksamana , p. 85 , 1.8) 

590. Sultan Mahmud : so Sh.; elsewhere he appears as 

Sultan Muhammad, see p. 125 , I .35 

590 a . terlalu baik _ itu: ? repunctuate terlalu baik paras-nya 7 

dalam tanah .. 

591. Tun Teja: see note on sa-telah didihat on p .171 

These notes refer to pages 161—167 of Winstedt’s romamzed text: 
see footnote on page 205 antea. 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 







translated by C. C. Brown 


247 


591 a . musim : ? the time after the padi harvest when there, would 
be plenty of people available for the work entailed by a royal wed¬ 
ding ? 

592. paduka ayabanda : Slutan Muhammad of Pahang was the 
uncle cf Sultan Mahmud cf Malacca, being the son of Sultan 
Mansur of Malacca. Paduka ayabanda may therefore stand for 
‘you’ in the letter. Equally it may mean 'my father’ 

592 a . nobat : see note on p. 59 , I .29 

593. di-persalini: cf. utusan oraiig jika pulang di-persalin , p. 85 ,. 

1-35 

594. adinda baginda : makes no sense. Lines 15 and 16 should, I 
think, read 

menengar bunyi surat adinda baginda itu. 

Maka baginda pun memulai . 

594 a . di-nobatkan : see note on di-nobat-lah on p .120 

595. ini konon : see note on istimewa on p .87 

596. terlalu sangat tabu: the suggestion cf course being that 
the S. R. could cast spells on the elephants and thereby stultify the 
efforts of the elephant-men (just as he could make his pony do what 
he liked with other riders, p. 158 ) 

596 a . tuan : see p. 143 , I .15 

597. Maka: ms Mari 

598. di-biseki-nya: Sh. adds di-katakan-nya suatu sbarat 

599. terjal: see W. under terjai 

. > 

600. di-niatkan (- nya MS) : dees 2 represent an . old 

spelling 3 of di-naikkan-nya w'hich Sh. has? 

601. ku-bawa kabawah duli : Sh. adds appositely akan mengba- 
puskan dosa-ku (the dosa being his failure on his mission to Kalinga, 
pp. 1 65 —7) 

602. apa daya kita : the kita here evidently does not include 
Saidi Ahmad. Sh. has apa daya aku. Hang Nadim was meditating 
panjat ‘adat, for which see R.O.W., The Malays, p .44 

603. masok-pelulut: re?4 masok si-pelulut 

604. makin: here = sebab. This use of makin survives in Perak 
in the form mengengkin , e.g. ' ngapa mengkin tak kamt• terang tanah 
kamu itu? 

605. hendak-lab ....: should read bendak-lab barang daya mak 
bawa kapada-ku. 

605 a . pole-cat : Sh. ubat guna. Pole-caf = civet, applying here to 
the musky perfumed got from the anal glands’ (O.E.D.) of the civet 

606. Sayang... baik-nya : I would read 

Sayang beta melibat rupa tuan yang baik paras ini belakikan raja 

ini : j ika'au raja yang besar laki tuan , alang-kab baik-nya? 

Sh. has jikalau raja besar-besar laki tuan 

606 a . Raja Malaka-lab raja besar. Sh. has Raja Malaka 
raja besar daripada Pabang ini 

607. Sa-telab di-libat : at this point according to Sh., Tun Teja 
was doubtful as to Hang Nacfm’s motives and thought he might be 
going to take her for himself # This was put to Hang Nadim, who 
replied with the verse Tun Teja Ratna Benggala (p .167 of this text). 
With the verse in this position 1 in the story the fine jika tuan tiada 
perebaya is the answer to Tun Teja’s suspicions, and according to 
Sh. it satisfies her. 

'These notes refer to pages 167—171 of Winstedt’s romanized text: 
see footnote on page 2,05 antea. 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 






248 


The Malay Annals 


608. ka-jong : MS , whereas ka-jong in 1.36 appears as 

£>S in the MS. ? is an error for £>• jand the 

sentence should read Bersegera karna jong hendak berlayar 

609. Ada pun. .. .orang-nya: ? for alat read akan ; for telah 
read terlalu and for segala read sa-kalif The passage would then 
run 

Ada pun akan nakhoda Saidi Ahmad itu bukan-nya barang- 
barang orang, terlalu perkasa-lah sa-kali orang-nya 
This makes sense and is Malay, which the text as it stand 
is not; but I admit that the relevance of this observation to the 
story is doubtful 

610. sedia-lah: MS 1 ? sedia ia-lah For the spelling of 

sedia see note on p. 81 , 1.13 

611. tangan-nya di-bungkus dengan kain: in Hang Tuah II, 
224 w 7 e read Mawa Hang Tuah pun segera-lah melabohkan tangan 
baju-nya y lain di-sambut tangan Tun Teja which accords with tangan- 
nya di-alas-nya dengan kain on p .17 3 , I .37 of this text. Di-bung¬ 
kus here however suggests more elaborate precautions 

612. Anakanda ... .tiada tahu : ? should read 

AnakOnda ghaib tiada - kelihatan, ka-mana pergi-nya 
sah aya . 

612a. semua-nya : for this -nya of p. 149 , I .46 

613. panah losong : unidentifiable. Sh. panah kosong y which is 
unhelpful, see W. 

614. hairan : Sh. adds melihat rupa Tun Teja and some such 

words must have been omitted by error in this, text: cf. hairan-lah 
Raja . melihat rupa puteri _on p. 45 , I .12 

614 a . masing-masing : sc. kembali as in Sh. 

615. daya di-minyak\ MS ? = di-ya di-empenak 

616. saperti kera... .duri: see note on anak harimau on p .140 

617. kena ke munch ak ... .belah: should read kena kemunchak 
tiang perahu Tun Aria, Uelah as in Sh. 

618. betul tiang akan : for akan ? read agong as in Sh. 

Betul here = tentang as commonly in colloquial Malay 

619. chebang : see W. under jebang 

619 a . sa-bag<ai : this is one of several instances in the S.M. (e.g. 
p. 190 , I. 7 ; p. 202 , I. 43 ; I. 211 , I. 37 ) in which sa-bagai is used with 
a meaning not noted in the dictionaries, viz. ‘ 00 ^^ 31 ^ < repeatedly > 

619 b . ular berbelit-belit : see note on anak harimau on p .140 

620. orang payang: i.e. a man who workecf as fisherman using 
a pukat payang ? For pukat payang see JMBRAS, 13 , pt. 
Ill, p. 106 

621. di-sebut orang : ? sc. datang sekarang as elsewhere in the 

SM. 

621*. menyuroh kerajaan : the word ^} cannot be iden¬ 
tified by Arabists with any meaning suitable here. ? an error for 
oJj t= tertibi 'organize’ ? Cf. p.i 33 > I .20 and p.i 94 , 1.2 for a 
similar description 

621 b . nobat-lah : see note on pi. 20 , I .35 

These notes refer to pages 171—178 of Winstedt’s romanized text: 
see footnote on page 205 antea. 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 






translated by C. C. Brown 


249 


622. persantapan : cf. Seri Rama itu alsal cheteria on p. 121 , 
I. 43 . If cheteria anak raja-raja (see note on bulubalang on p. 45 ), 
the use of persantapan here is explained. Otherwise it would, be a 
mere complimentary substitute for ayapan 

623. sa-sa’at: ? sc. dudok 

623 a . tiada terlalu turut : lit. he could not follow. Lain here 
is used to express physical ability, as commonly in Perak 

624. Mawara ' n-nahar: Trans, Oxiania—i.e. Bokhara, Samarkand 
etc. 

625. di-bachakan-nya sembah : cf. p. 125 , I .42 anc| p. 146 , 11 . 1—5 

626. di-bawakan gendang\ bring it (the letter) with drum: cf. 
Mukarram lillallah fVl-alam 

627. aUMuazian... ..:read al-Mu’anam al-Malik aU 

Mukarram iiiikallah fid-alam 

628. ini-lab : for the probable answer see R.O.W. Malays, p .38 

629. Maka Maharaja Dewa Sura pun: here evidently should 

come, as in Sh., di-surohkan raja Siam menyerang Pahang. Maka 

M.D.S. pun belengkap .: which explains the otherwise obscure 

dan penyuroh Raja benua Siam in I .12 

630. jikalau tiada menyuroh : Sh. has baik juga yang di-pertuan 
menyuroh 

631. merugi: cf. p. 142 , I .21 

632. Maka Bendahara . pergi-lah : should read 

Maka Bendahara S.M. pun belengkap-lah. Sa-telah sudah 
lengkap, maka di-anugerahi persalin dengan sa-perU-nya. Sa- 
telah sudah itu , maka Bendahara S.M. pun pergi-lah 
and I have translated accordingly 

633. sembilan laksa : becomes sembilan-belas laksa on p. 181 , 
1 . 39 . The same discrepancy will be found in Sh. 

634. Laksamana . Raya: this comes in very abruptly and 

there must be some omission in- the MS here. After the passage 
describing the strength of the fleet etc, Sh. has a new paragraph 

Sa-telah datang ka-Batu Pahat y maka be'rtemu dengan Laksa¬ 
mana: datang dari Sungai Raya 
which gives the sense required 

635. sahaya belum mine gar titah: cf. the incident of the Sri 
Bija 'diraja on p. 150 , II. 41—4 and see note thereon. Why the Laksa¬ 
mana wa)s unwilling to go is not explained! Possibly he was piqued 
at not having been formally commissioned ( di-titahkan )? 

636. orang Malaka. .. .dia: should be omitted 

637. Tuan: see p. 143 , I. 5 , 

638. api: MS If api is correct, = materials for making a 

fire for cooking, such as might have to be carried in uninhabited 
country ? 

639. maka kapitan: read maka oleh kapitan 

640. in gin melihat negeri Malaka itu: Sh. ia pun terlalu ingin 
menengar khabar negeri Malaka itu which means not he greatly de¬ 
sired to hear news of Malacca’ (he had already received the report) 
but 'on hearing this account of Malacca he greatly desired to possess 
it (Malacca)’. Similarly terlalu ingin meihat here dees not mean 
'he greatly desired to see Malacca’: cf. the pantun line hati ingin 
melihat bunga which means 'the sight of the flower inflames my desire’: 

These notes refer to pages 179—182 of Winstedt’s romanized text: 
see footnote on page 205 ante a. 

J952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 








250 


The Malay Annals 


and clearly kebesaran or some such word has been omitted by error 
after me b hat. The meaning is ‘seeing how great (?) a city Malacca 
was he greatly desired to possess it’. Cf. Sa-telah Sultan Mansur 
Shah menengar khabar Pahang itu f imka terlaju ingini baginda akan 
negeri Pahang itu 

641. berperang saperti api : is not Malay. There must be an 
omission. ? as on p. 191 , I .5 the sentence should run lalu berperang , 
kilat api saperti kilat di-udara 

641a. Kapitan Mor : Portuguese capitao-mor ‘great captain’, 

an ancient rank in the Portuguese navy 

642. Jika demikian : Sh. 'has Mengapa engkau berkata demi¬ 
kian itu ? If Jika demikian is right, I take the meaning to be ‘If 
as you suggest, another expedition (under the same leadership) 
is doomed to failure, wait until I can go myself.’ 

643. makim : read makin 

644. menghantar sireh: See P.M.S., Life & Customs, Pt. I, 

p .23 

645. jahat : see note on jahat on p. 99 , I .28 

645 a . bersuap-suapan : cf. p. 157 , 1 . 10 

646. Tun Terang : see p. 194 , I .30 

647. tidak ada tara-nya : but see p. 184 , 11 . 3—4 

648. ashik-ashik: so Sh., but the MS has 

649. emboh : this word which in the negative ta’emboh is in 
daily use on the East Coast of Feninsula is seldom heard now in 
positive 

650. arak : read arah as in the MS 

650 a . pahatan bendul . dinding : ? cross-beams and wall¬ 

planking not yet put into place but still being ‘shaped’ (pahat) by 
the carpenters. For pahat cf. p. 115 , I .28 

651. kata benar-lah : not in Sh. ? “Tell the truth” 

652. sa-ekor: Sh. sa~ekor sa-orang, which is more likely 

653. engkau anak si-anu : it is a question ‘So you’re so and . 
•so’s son, are you ?’ 

654. peri kebesaran : see note on p. 160 , I .44 Sh. adds pertinently 
iiada mengenal hamba sahaya daripada banyak-nya 

655. datang mengadap menyembah : ? sc. lalu between menga- 
■dap and menyembah. Sh. datang hendak menyembah pada Benda - 
hara. 

656. patut : Sh. boleh . If pctut is correct, it must mean ‘deem 
fitting’ ? 

657. bichar a : MS i.e. cchara : see note mengajari 

on p .82 

658. sa-tahil: MS due*- ? an error for (= sa-kati) as 

in Sh. and also on p. 186 , I .15 

659. di-polu-nya : Sh: di-tepok-nya. He struck the door a re¬ 
sounding blow? 

660. anak isteri-nya : Sh. segala anak isteri-nya. ‘His family* 
in fact. See note on isteri on p .56 

661. apa juga khabar ... .dengar: Sh. has, more correctly, apa 
juga ada khabar tuan hamba dengar? 

These motes refer to pages 182—186 of Winstedt’s romanized text: 
see footnote on page 205 ante a. 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 





translated by C. C. Brown 


251 


662. bendak membunoh: Sh. bendak menyurob membunob, 
which is more likely 

662a. di-kerjakan-nya : see note on p. 92 , 1.8 

662 b . Saudara : cf. engkau ku-aku saudara, see note on p. 158 , 

I. 31 

663. takbta kerajaan : Sh. adds menempa cberek mas dan kans 
mas. It was when Sultan Mahmud saw that these things were not 
among the property of the Bendahara (see p. 187 , 11 . 33 — 6 ) that he 
realised the falsity of the story he had been told 

664. di-samun : cf. tertawan-lab hati-nya akan arta dunia on 
p. 170 , I .38 

665. kabul-lab pada hati baginda : Sh. adds appositely saperti 

orang mengantok di-sorong bantal. See no.e on anak barimau 

on p .140 

666 . membinasak-an nama : cf. binasa-lah nama segala Melayu 
yang dabulu hala itu on p. 215 , I .12 

667. anakanda: i.e. Sultan Mahmud, who was the Bendahara’s 
nephew 

668 . membawa titab : in the MS this passage runs Sang Sura 
datang berlari dari dalam membawa titab pada Sang ( ? Tun) 
Sura “ Titab yang di-pertuan jangan semua-nya di-bunoh” and I 
have translated accordingly. Sang Sura : see note on p. 1584 I .31 

668 a . Sang Sura: see note on p. 158 , I .31 

669. budak sa-mata : Sh., better, budak-budak sa-mata. Sa-mata 
= sabaja , see W. under semata 

669 a . takat: ? takut. Sh. has mudab-mudaban 

669 b . sudab-lab .: I read this ajs sudab-lab lukab dari teng- 

kok-ny.a datang ka-puting-puting-nya. The word £ may well be 
an error for <S^ lukab , ? a ‘gaping’ wound, see W. under lukab 

II. Puting-puting 'the nipples’. 

670. ia kelak : he became Sri Nara ‘diraja, see p. 194 , 11. 11 — 4 . 

671. segala pusaka _ ka-dalam : according to Sh., when Jun 

Sura and Tun Indra arrived with the creese, Tun Hasan Temenggong 
proposed to throw the Bendahara’s treasure chests into the river: 
but the Bend, forbade hm, saying that it was obvious the Sultan was 
killing him for his money and therefore aftetf his death his gold was 
to go to the Sultan akan kebaktian kita , 

672. telab : I cannot identify The wore ' 1 evidently 

retates to his physical infirmities. 

673. Bendabara... .di-gagabi juga: Sh. <e Bendabara apa-tab ini y 
yang sudab tepok dan lesa demikian ini?” Maka Paduka Tuan 
bermobon y tiada mau jadi Bendabara: maka di-gagabi jua oleb Sultan 
Mahmud: and that is how the passage should run; The words maka 
di-gagabi... .Bendabara could hardly have been said by the Paduka 
Tuan 

674. kapada yang lain: should read kapada anak yang lain as 
in Sh? 

674 a . membunoh: as he could have done, being Bencfahara, for 
whose powers see R.O.W., The Malays, p .72 

675. Bagai-bagai pada: ? Bagai-bagai pula. Cf. Lain-lain pula 
kata Bendabara on p. 219 , I .21 

These notes refer to pages 186—190 of Winsted’s romanized text: 
see footnote on page 205 antea. 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 





252 


The Malay Annals 

676. Khoja Ahmad : must be the Tun Ahmad mentioned) on p. 134 , 
I. 33 . He becomes Bendahara, p .194 

677. Tun Isak Berakah : has aleady appeared with distinction, 
see p. 146 , l.ji; p. 153 , I. 14 ; p. 156 , 1.8. Becomes Paduka Tuan, p. 194 , 

1 .11 anc ultimately Bendahara, p. 214 , I .40 

678. turut mashghul: i.e. as she was mashghul , so was he. 

679. Sang Sura : see note on maka titah on p .158 
679 a . Sultan Mahmud : ? an error for Sultan Ahmad as in Sh. 

Seq I .13 above. 

680. ia-lah kita rajakan : see p. 194 , 1-44 
680 a . itu-lah yang di-kasehi baginda: see p. 207 , 1.6 

681. baginda mengaji : Sh. says it was Sultan Ahmad, which ac¬ 
cords with p. 177 , I. 25 . See also p. 191 , I .21 

682. wardi : surely f \ stands for armada ? 

683. berlengkap pula : the arithmetic is faulty and the details 
of the fleet do not agree with 11 . 10—12 

683 a . kachang di-re ndang : see note on anak harimau on, p .140 

684. Seri Awadana : Temenggong Tun Mai Ulat Bulu, Sultan 
Ahmad's chief favourite, see p. 190 , I .26 

685. bertimbal rengka : MS makhdum di-bawa bertimbal rengka 

686 . meiighimpunkan orang: presumably not a mere repetition 
of the statement in 11 . 12—13 but indicates a special force called 
out to repel the impending attack of which the Franks had gratuit¬ 
ous given warning in I .31 ! 

686 a . Si-suroh : misprint 
686 b . Sahaja : MS sahajas-sahaja 

687. Hikayat Muhd . Hanafiah : see R.O.W., Malay Literature, 
pp .65 and 72 , 

688. Ilikayat Ham^ah: ibid. p. 203 

689. maka : MS jika 

690. tertawai-wawai : unidentifiable. ? ‘isolated. Sh. terdiri 

691. di-telentangkan: should read di-telentangkan , see W. 

under telentang . Instead of wy# the MS has baginda 

692. tertahu-tahu : Sh. yvmg pilehan 

693. X.J : I read as ^ 1 ? 

694. : ? d< 3 n ujong balai as Sh. 

695. lain ka-Pahang : where according to p. 215 , I .43 he ‘reigned" 

for a year , 

696. Kopak : the attack by the Portuguese on this place is 
described in Sh. xxxiv, pp, 231—5 

697. ayam snap : ? hand-fed, and consequently a plumper and 
more toothsome bird than the ordinary Malay fowl which kais pagi 
makan pagi y kais petang makan petang ? 

697. a kerjakan : ‘make an end of him', see note on p. 92 , 1.8 
Sh. unctuously adc’h (ch. xxxiv, p. 225 ) saperti firman Allah etc. but 
the 'laconics kerjakan of this text is probably nearer the truth 

698. di-kepongkan : should read di-kampongkan, see note on 
mengepong on p .48 

699. Ian git menimpa bumi : see note on anak harimau on p. 

141 . _t 

These notes refer to pages 190 — 194 of Winstedt's romanized text: 
see footnote on page 205 antea. 

J952] Royal Asiatic Society 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 




translated by C. C. Brown 


253 


699 a . Jika si-Ahmad', better, as Sh., jika pada si-Ahmad 

700. Tun Pekerma: should be Tun Pikrama Wira, see pp. 134 , 
1.32 and p. 189 , 1.5 

701. Tun Isak : presumably Tun Isak Berakah, who was grand¬ 
son of former Paduka Tuan, p. 146 , I .31 

702. Tun Hanucab: see p. 187 , I. 32 : grimly described in Sh. as 
yang sis a bunoh itu 

703. Seri Maharaja : read Seriwa Raja y see p. 169 , I .15 

703 a . Tun Muhammad : an error for Tun Mahmud , see p. 212 , 

1-37 

704. beranakkan : omit. This was the Laksamana punished 
on p. 187 , *l- 4 i 

705. ia-lah . kali : better ia-lah yang sangat mashur gagab 

beraniy berperang bertimbakan darah juga tiga-pulob-dua kali 
following Sh.: i. e. ‘fought in battles in which blood was shed by 
the bucketful' 

705 a . peraturan bonda: cf. p. 165 , I .26 and see note on pera- 
turan on p .42 

708. dudok .: a better punctuation would be dudok di- 

adap orangy pada tempat baginda itu pertama . 

706 a . segala : read sa-kali < 

70Q b . di-chukur orang : ? = di-suroh chukur. Sh. has di- 
chukur Bendahara . For the ceremony see W. under akikah. 

707. Sultan ‘Abdullah : son of Raja Menawar Shah, who was 
a son of Sultan Ala’u’d-din of Malacca. Made ruler of Kampar on 
p. 149 , I .17 anc'l married to Sultaln Mahmud’s daughter on p. 159 , 1.2 

708. Di-bela-hela: I suggest a different scansion 

Di-hela-hela di-retil (?), 

Sa-hasta kandis di-penggalkan; 

Alang-kah gila raja kechil ? 

Menggusta manis di-tinggalkan 

Melihat buah hartal masak 

(For another example of a 5 —line verse, see Sh. XII, p. 71 ) 

709. di-retak: MS It should be some w'ord which rhymes 

with kechil or possibly kechek 

709 a . Tun Biajit : ? the s^me man as Tun Biajit anak Laksa - 
mana , see note on p. 154 , I .13 

709 b . sakai ( ) : for a similar addity of spelling cf. 

p. 117 , I .26 where sagu appears in the MS as • ^ ee note 

on p. 222 , last line 

709 c . Sultan Narasinga : see p. 165 , l- 2 ° 

710. di-pileh-nya : MS di-pelihara-nya 

711. segala Menangkabau bersama-sama : obscure. ? A com¬ 
bination of the M. men to defeat Tun Biajit 

71 l a . tahiT. See note on p. 154 , 1.6 

71 l b . Maka adadah : ? Maka has been inserted by error and 
ada-lah is a mistake for oleh 

71 l c . taroh-nya: see note on p. 67 , 1 . 3-2 

These notes refer to pages 194—199 of Winstedt’s romazined text: 
see footnote on page 205 ante a. 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 







254 


The Malay Annals 


71 l d . sa-kati : ? transpose the (”) to come after tahil in I.12 

712. guroh . itu-lah : should, I think, read 

gemuroh bunyi-bunyi-nya . Sejak itu-lah 

See W. under sejak , which appears again on p.204, I.42 

713. oleh kapitan : ? sc. di-ikat 

714. ka-sana-sana: read ka-mana-mana . For the sentiment of 
the verse cf. 

Tentu sugar itu lapok; 

Mengapa di-patah-patahf 
Tentu gadong itu mabok; 

Mengapa di-ratah-ratah ? 

715. anak-ku: Sultan ‘Abdullah of Kampar was Sultan 
Mahmud's son-in-laiw, p.159, 1.2 

716. Maharaja Ishak : see p.165, 11.13—19 

717. mudek-lah : there is an omission in the MS here of 
some description of his arrival at the island 

718. makci di-dudokkan . Bendabara: obscure. I suggest re¬ 

punctuation as follows 

Maka di-dudokkan di-bawah Laksamana karna l adat Mah . 
Lingga dudok di-bawah Laks. Jikalau pada pemegian barang 
ka-mana serta akan berhenti , maka M. L. mengenjamkan 
sombong Laks. dan Raja Tuiigkal-lah . 

719. mengenjamkan : ? mengunjamkan ‘make to stick up' and 
so ‘enhance’ 

720. sedia berkelahi : for the -reason given on p.165 

721. sudah menantu : ? intended for sudah di-ambil akan me- 
nantu as e.g. on p.108, I.5 

721 a . dapat : cf. siapa kamu dapat menangkap on p.75, l.n 

721 1 *. membasoh chunting-ku : see my Malay Sayings, p.11 

722. di-muka = di-muka ki-andeka 7 see W. under 

andeka 

723. dTambil-nya : presumably repre:ents di-ambil-nya 

sa-cheper y but we are not told what was on the cheper land (j^-1 two 
lines below Cannot be identified 

724. berkepong : surely berkampong : see note on mengepong 
on p.48 

725. maka :? te (r) lenga-lab, see W. under lenga 

726. menjeinput : see note on di-jemput on p.56 

727. kcdapatan kata : means ‘to be shewn up as having failed 
to do\ what you said you would do’ 

728. baginda murka : and apparently never forgave him, see 
p.221, I.37 et sqq. 

729. mata ( — mata) : ? ‘observer’ 

730. Sang Setia dekat ( oS, ): ? dekat represents yang 
dekat ( sa-kali ) 

731. rampasan : see note on rampasan on p.48. Were they in 
fact hamba-hamba perempuan being taken to Malacca for such a 
sale as is described in Hkt. ‘Abdullah p.189 et sqq. ? 

These notes refer to pages 199—204 of Winsledt’s romanized text: 
see footnote on page 205 ante a. 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 






translated by C. C. Brown 


255 


732. pada bicbara-nya : because the rampasan would ordinarly 
be stowed in the stern of the ship, whereas Tun Krah’s ship was 
sarat ka-baluan ? 

733. di-kepongkaii-nya : surely di-kampongkan-nya . See note 
on mengempong on p .48 

734. sama-nya buiubalang : cf. the similar incidents and phras¬ 
ing on p. 142 , l.io and p. 224 , I .40 

735. sedia sa-benar-nya : cf. p. 225 , 1.8, a similar context 

735 a . Orang Kaya ini lagi ada : for the Paduka Tuan to be 
present when the Sultan of Indragiri’s drum was beaten would be 
tantamount to his admitting that the Sultan of Indragiri was his 
master, not the Sultan of Malacca. 

736. bermusoh : ? = mengcdap musoh. Cf. the similar kita 
akan berperang on p. 132 , I .7 

737. menggercnek : signifies the ‘patter’ on the drum preliminary 

to the pain? , 

738. pengbulu gajah : the only mention in the S.M. of this 
officer, though references to the panglima gajab are numerous (e.g. 
on pp. 151 , 153 and 176 ) 

739. memkawa tanglong : this was a night attack 

740. gajab pun : ? gajab pula 

741. jika sedikit. ... : I read this as follows:— 

Jika sedikit belalai gajab ini menggeruit tinggal rang-nya y 
bamba tendang 

and I have translated accordingly 

742. Sayid al-Hck: I am indebted to R.OAV. for the following 
note : 

“Sayid al-Hak = Sayid An-aThak = ‘I am He’, a name 
taken by the famous Sufi martyr Mansur, who was impaled for 
taking such a lying, blasphemous title by the lvha-lifa Muktadir 
(922 A.D.) at Baghdad. He was learned in the Vedanta and so 
took the pantheist name.” 

743. Prti-nya : ‘what you think is..’ Cf. tabu-lab patek akan 
erti-nya on p. 219 , I .16 

744. sa-gagab<nya kutok : ? ‘however much you may curse me7 

744 a . Sa-akan : ? masakan 

745. ka-rumab-nya : after this should come the concluding 

sentence of ch. XXVI ( Satelab itu _ ka-Inderagiri) on p .206 

746. Sultan Ibrahim’. formerly Megat Kudu, brought to 
Malacca as a captive after the defeat of Siak ,a'nd married to a 
dlaughter of Sultan Mansur, see p .124 et sqq. 

746 a . terkenang : see note on mengenang on p. 112 , I .24 

747. sen(j)ak: see note on gurob on p. 196 , I .26 

748. Paduka Tuan 1 : clear, ipar , see next paragraph in 

the text. See note on p. 8 o, I .17 

748 a . perdana menteri : read paramenteri 

748 b . janji: read chincbin 

748 c . kita buangkan .... timbul: ? a way of expressing his hope, 
albeit a faint one, that with the assistance of Tun Aria and his men 
(see 1 . 2 q above) he might still recover Malacca from the Portuguese? 

These notes refer to pages 204—207 of Winstedt’s romanized text: 
see footnote on page 205 ante a, 

J952] Royal Asiatic Society 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 




256 


The Malay Annals 


749. Sa-telah itu . Inderagiri : misplaced in the MS: should' 

come at the end of ch.XXV 

750. Sultan Husain : we are not told what relation he was to 

the Maharaja ‘diraja of Haru of whom we read at p .145 et sqq.: but 
it is noticeable that into his mouth (in the passage beginning jika t aku 
two Ones below) are put very much the same words as were used 
by the Maharaja ‘diraja on p. 147 , l.n et sqq., see note on jikalau 
aku .on p .147 

751. Raja Puteh : see p. 190 , I .42 

75l a . ka-Hujong Tanab : see note on p. 123 , I .23 

752. seteru : an allusion to the war between Haru and Malacca 
on pp. 146—7 ? , 

753. pebujangan : see note on lanchang pemujangap on p .59 

754. Sultan Muda\ i.e. Raja Ala’u’d-din, Sultan Mahmud’s son 
by Tun Fatimah, see p. 194 , I .38 

755. di-kayohkan sakai : was this merely in order that he should 
arrive more quickly (see I .36 below) or did he feel as did the Sultan 
of Pahang whose principal concern, in the incident related on pp. 
222 — 4 , seems to have been to get Pateh Ludang’s sakai crew for 
himself? 

756. du.a buah perahu juga: i.e. instead of waiting for the as¬ 
sembling of a more pretentious kelengkapan ? 

757. Ada pun . " Tarob I would read this passage as 

follow's:— 

Ada pun . bamipir Sultan Husain. Apabila 

orang menyabong di-balaman balai itu , bunyi sorak- 

nya y maka Sultan Husain . menyabong itu; 

daripada sangat ‘ashik baginda y maka baginda 
mengereng kapada Sultan MS. mengunjokkan tangan 
seraya kata-nya y “Tarob.” 

757 a . baginda • ? mengereng as on p .143 (see note on 

men giving) 

757 b . : ? mengunjokkan which would signify that he 

had something in his hand, viz. the money he wanted put on for him 

758. pada: MS oU = paba ? 

759. yang menindeh: ? = yang terlebeh sa-kali 

760. di-terima : ? sc. jcdi menantu-nya 

761. oleh baginda... .di-kitar-nya: obscure. I gather that 
Sultan H. ripped off the sleeve of his jacket, closed the one end of 
it and then filled the resultant bag with gravel which made a noise 

like a rattle as he whirled it round his head. I read utif. ‘T 
as charek rak ! bunyi-nya (see W. under rak) ' 

761 a . menyarongkan : ? change the sheath of his creese? 

762. tegari: ? read pegawai , the suggestion being that indul¬ 
gence to his daughter in her conduct, which would have been bad 
enough in a mere pegawai with his comparatively limited powers, 
was indefensible in a Sultan ? 

763. Ambang: ? Embong 

764. umpat: MS cJUlS* which locks like ke-empat. See fol¬ 
lowing note 

These notes refer to pages 207—209 of Winstedt’s romanized text: 
see footnote on page 205 antea. 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 









translated by C. C. Brown 


257 


764a. a;\S ....c\&a : none of these 

three words as they stand can be identified. Is it possible that <>'^ 
is an error for <>'Y and that t c\5^ represents 

(‘having a fit of latah’) ? The word seems to suggest some 

such action as 'plucking at' 

765. bini-nya pergi : ? sc. tinggal before bini-nya 

766. memberi : ? membawa 

767. tujoh-belas ; ? angkatari: cf. bidangan 'mi- 

numan pula di-angkat orang Seri Rama, p .47 

768. Bagimana pula....hidangan kUa: I read this 
Bagaimana pula besar-nya hidanganf Hurup ( urup ) empat 
daripada hidangan kita 

Hurup (?) empat: i.e. one of their dishes can be changed (as a 
dollar is changed' into smaller pieces) into four of ours' ? 

769. Sultan Pahang . akan\ '(raja itu . segala raja-rajar 

The text is evidently defective as (a) it dtoes not give the Sultan 
of Pahang’s name, an omission for which in the case of Malay 
rulers there is cjnly one parallel in the S.M. (b) akan raja itu as 
it stands is meaningless (c) we are not told who segata raja-raja 
were. 

770. di-suratkan akan berkerja: appiently means 'a list was 
to be made of the duties to be performed by the slaves' 

771. Seri Awadana menyuratkan: Sh. xxxiv, p .231 et sqq.. 
gives a Very different story of this incident. See R.O.W., History 
of Malaya, pp. 73—4 

772. :? si-Tanda , short for Pertanda? The Temeng- 

gong had to 'carry out executions’ (R.O.W., The Malays, p. 73 1 ) 
and the slave mentioned here was the man who actually performed' 
the execution ? 

773. 1 : epoky see W. sub voc . Cf. p. 98 , I .39 where 

tepak dan kendi should read epok dan kemendelam 

774. : kemendelam ‘ewe:’ 

774«. di-matikan: ? optative rather than indicative 

775. gorap-nya: I read this as go rap (ghurab)-nya di-T engkilu^ 
penjajap-nya telata-lata. For gorap see W. under ghurab. Telata - 
lata = merata/*rata ? 

775 a . menitahkan . menitahhan: the first menitahkan is- 

used as noted on p. 64 , I. 24 : but the second must be an error foi 
titah-nya 

776. : ? guly i. e. ‘our ship is bumping (the river bed)V 
i.e. ‘is aground' ? 

777. berjabat ; MS U-y>* ? tercbabut ‘they pulled up the- 

mooring stakes? 

778. salah Utah: cf. p. 192 , I .9 

779. Shahid: see nofte on p .138 

779 a . Sedia patek-lah: Sh. Ya-lah patek membawa .? for 

These notes refer to pages 209—212 of Winstedt's romanized text:, 
see footnote on page 205 antea. 

1952 ] Royal Asiatic Society 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 








258 The. Malay Annals 

sedia patekdah here read sedia-lah patek — ‘I am resolved to’ 

780. Mahmud : Tun Mahmud, p. 161 , I. 9 : brother of the Sri 
Nara ‘diraja who is speaking to him he.e: they were both sons of 
the Sri Nara ‘diraja who was executed on p .187 

781. tiada kuasa: ‘had not the stvength’ (pace W. ‘not of phy¬ 
sical strength’): not as on p. 164 , I .43 tiada kuasadah patek sakalian 
dudok di-Malaka ini where tiada kuasa has its common colloquial 
meaning ‘have no desire to’ 

782. sa-kupang pun tiada : presumably the gold mentioned at 
I .28 on p .212 was still with the Bendahara ? 

783. karas: see notte on p .159 

784. di-sambut-nya : ? di-sembat-nya y ;as on p. 109 , I .28 

785. menjemput : see note on di-jemput on p .56 

785 a . Tun Mahmud .. .Selangor: see p. 206 , 1.6 

786. bapa patek : Bendahara Lubok Batu, p .188 

787. di-Kampar : where, according to p.215, I.44, he reigned 
for five years 

788. Tun Talani : elsewhere in this text Tun Telanai. Evi¬ 
dently a very old title: it appears in an ancient inscription from 
Siam. When the Bend. Speaks of it in I .15 as kehutan-hutanan 
he probably had in mind the Telanai of Trengganu (p. 141 , I. 22 ) and 
also possible the Telanai of Bentan, see note on p. 61 , I. 43 . On the 
other hand there was a Tun Telanai in Malacca, a son of a Benda¬ 
hara (!), see p. 98 , I. 23 ; p. 118 , I .34 and p. 159 , I .20 

789. Nara : should be Sura , see p. 206 , I .3 

790. gelar mentua-nya: see p. 206 , I .3 

790 a . segera . Seri Agar: if to the Malay ear of the time 

there was a resemblance in sound between segera and Seri Agar , was 
the latter pronounced Seri Agera ? 

791. Raja Pahlawan: see also p. 145 , I .39 

792. ‘adat Haru . ka-atas : obscure as it stands and the text 

is suspect. To make sense the passage should run something like 
this 

- jika makan , barang siapa orang besar ka-atas; dan 

jika minum , barang siapa be rani ka-atas 
•and I have translated accordingly 

793- Paduka Tuan : Tun Isak Berakah, son of the deceased 
Bendahara Paduka Raja (Tun Pikrama Wira), see note on p .189 

793 a . Kala itu : substitute a comma for the fullstop after itu 

794. raja-raja : see note oin maka anakanda baginda 

on p .90 

798. Raja Muda Perempuan: so the MS, but Perempuan is an 
obvious blunder for pun. This Raja Muda was Raja Muzaffar Shah, 
see p. 194 , I .29 

796. <0 : ? nyah 

796 a . Tun Terang: see p. 194 , 1-3Q 

797. Enche y jJ : the reference evidently is to Tun Fatimah 
mother of Sultan Ala’u’d-din and Sultan Mahmud’s favourite wife. 

These notes refer to pages 212—216 of Winstedt’s romanized text: 
see footnote on page 205 ante a, 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 







translated by C. C. Brown 


259 


According to the Perak Salasilah ( JSBRAS y No. 9 , p. 96 ) she was 
called ‘‘Inche’ Tan (sic: ? Tun) ” 

798. hendak-lah f? : ? hendak-lah di-perbaiki , cf. hendak- 

lab ia di-perbaiki .on p. 57 , I .17 

798 a . baginda : ? should read lalu baginda 

799. sa-orang Manjong ^ : MS ^ which may 

be an error for ^ corresponding with Siu-M-ia, the name given 
in the Perak Salasilah (op. cit). Conversely the ^ of the 

MS may stand for Siak Mai (cf. Tun Mai), the man in question be- 
ing of Siak origin? 

799 a . Seri Agar Raja: Tun Mahmud: see p. 206 , 1.6 and p. 214 , I .22 

799 b . jemput ka-Selangor: 'fetch him from Selangor/ cf. men- 
jeput saudara-nya .ka-Manjong on p. 79 , l.n ajnd see note on di-jemput 
on p. 56 , I .19 

800. Sultan Mahmud Shah: Sh. Sultan Mansur Shah . See note 
on Sultan Pahang on p. 210 . 

801. bunga emas: “thi<> tribute consists of pure gold and silver 

worked into the shape of flowers.sent every three years to the 

Court of Siam by the Rajas of Malay States under Siamese influence/’ 
(C. ajnd S. 1894 ) 

802. Berakelang : ? a Malay approximation to the Bar colon 
which is how Gervaise in 1688 in bis Natural and Political History of 
the Kingdom of Siam (p. 33 ) represents the Siamese Phra-Khlang , 
Minister for Foreign Affairs 

803. Orang Pahang . di-Kelang y datok: evidently what was 

intended is 

Orang Pahang berkitfm surat pada Adi Kelang y datok 
tiada berkirim-kah ? 

(Cf. Adi Berakelang in 1. 24 below) This reading fits in well with 
the Bendahara’s reply to the question 

803 a . bunyi-nya: see note on p. 68 , I .40 

804. tambera: ? from Siamese tarn ra 'Record of Precedence’. 
The word appears in Kedah Laws (op. cit., p. 27 ) Tembera Datok 
Seri Paduka Tuan with the meaning ‘Laws' (?) 

805. kembali ka-Hujong Tanah: a description of the founding 
of the new settlement is given in Sh. xxxiv, p .245 

806. anak saudara patek dengan daya patek: unintelligible as 
it stands. ? read anak saudara patek , patek dengaii dia patek ‘the 
Raja Perempuan is my niece: with her (as 3he is Raja Perempuan) I 
{patek) am only a patek / For a similar idea cf. p. 215 , l.i 

806 a . nasi dengan periok-nya: to indicate that the Bendahara of 
Perak could only be summoned by the Bendahara of Ujong Tanah 
and no: by a mere orang besar such as Tun Pekerma: and it was 
so interpreted by Bendahara Paduka Tuan, see I .36 below. 

807. ia rebah . ka-kanan: i.e. we’ll die together. 

808. kehendak: the MS adds hati 

809. ' ayapan: see note on persantapan on p .177 

809 a . Mengapa-tah: sc. berkata as in I .3 of p. 215 ? 

810. Pada bichara kiia....: cf. j ikalau tiada aka?i patut pada 

These notes refer to pages 216—219 of Winst^dt’s romanized text: 
see footnote on page 205 antea, 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 









260 


The Malay Annals 

bichara kita , masakan mau kita .on p. 215 , I. 4 . The position 

of the pada bichara kita in that instance is better. 

811. jadi-lah : should read jadi gab 

812. erti-nya : see note on p. 204 , I .7 

812a. Lekat hati-nya akan daku : i.e. !he will leave Ujong Tanah 
and come here to serve me. Cf. the case of Sri Agar Raja, p. 218 , I. 3 : 

813. melintas pada hati : cf. jikalau melintas pada hati-mu on 
P-144, 1.44 

814. laindain pula : cf. bagai-bagai pada (? pula) Bendahara 
on p. 188 , I .37 

815. babis nasi _ juga : should read habis nasi di-dalam sir eh 

itUf di-bunoh-nya pula lagi y lauk sa-lauk itu juga : i.e. he took a) little 
more rice but no more lauk 

816. Mandalika Kelang : the copyist has evidently nodded here,, 

as he w:ites Mandalika Kelang as S , the same spelling 

as Mendaliar on p. 183 , I .4 : and I read this as Mendaliar Keling 
and thought the reference to be to the revenue the laitter would, 
have collected as Shaihbandar. R.O.W. however emphatically dis¬ 
sents and says that a Mandulika of Klaing is mentioned by Tome- 
Pi res 

816 a . Bendahari-lah : read Penghulu Bendahari-lah 

817. sa-kali: ? read segala 

818. : ? only a variant of on p. 144 , I .27 (see 

note on dunia i y~>\ ibid.), and the meaning in both cases is 'this' 

819. Tiada tahu.. .kami: should read Tiada tahu akan isti ’adat 

daripada sangat _ kami . The sense of tiada tahu here is Take no 

account of; cf. talda tahu aka?i jahat-nya on p. 95 , I. 21 . Isti ’adat is 

written in the MS 

820. karas Bandan: see note on p .159 

821. Jjx— : sandal a wedge or any other such thing used to- 
keep a lid or anything similar tightly closed. 

821a. Malaka : ? di-Malaka 

822. pengluru-nya..... .cf. the description on p .211 ? I .3 

823. termurkai : MS termurka ia. See p. 200 , I .27 

824. Mari panah : the speaker was Hang Nadim (made Laksa- 
mana on p. 194 , I. 24 ). For his skill as an archer see p. 173 , l.i et sqq- 

825. dahan-nya: MS Is this merely an error for 

or does it represent dahian-nya? A tree undoubtedly has a dagu 
(the bole). Has it also a dahi (the upper part of the trunk)? 

826. tunda: ? tali tunda 

827. oleh... ka-sungai\ ? oleh dia rebah ka-sungai 

828. buloh karah Sayong , takut : ? read as buloh karah 7 sayang- 

takut .(it would be a pity if....) 

829. orang (sukal) : the MS has ^;jWs this sukal r 

which is unknown to the dictionaries, yet another variant of sakar 
which on p. 195 , I .27 is written and on p. 223 , 1.12 


These notes refer to pages 219—223 of Winstedfs romanized text; 
see footnote on page 205 antea . 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 







translated by C. C. Brown 


261 


829 a . di-hulu Batu Belah : clearly means 'above Batu Belah’ 
— di-sa-belah hulu Batu Belah 

830. itu-lah maka : see note on p. 82 , I .15 

830 a . Rebat : Jakuns (but not Malays) remember this name 
'and pointed out the spot to R.O.W., a narrow channel up the Johore 
River. 

831. tiada-lah : cf. kita .akan undor dari sini, tiada-lah oni p. 212 , 

bi7 . 

832. Maka sakai pun . Feringgi : I would re-punctuate thus 

Maka sakai pun habis terjun, melainkan tinggal Tun Amat 
‘Ali juga terdiri sa-orang di-atas perahu itu. Dalam pada 
bedil yang saperti hujan itu , maka perabu T.A.A. pun 
hanyut ... 

832 a . Demikian-lah dengan sebut : obscure. There 

is an Arabic word meaning 'retinue’ which does suit the 

context to some extent; but why should the speaker have used it 
instead of its Malay equivalent? From the way the word is written 

in the MS it might be , ? a copyist’s spelling blunder for 

(ma y siyat) ? If so, the sentence might mean' That’s 
what people call a vile deed’, i.e. ' I here’s a vile deed for you- ? 

833. abang : correct if Sultan Muzaffar Shah of Pahang was 
the son of his predecessor pace the saudara in I .3 

834. sama: should be sama-nya: cf, the similar incidents and 
phraseology on pp. 142 and 201—2 

835. ]ikalau _ tuan-ku: I would read thus 

Jikalau lain rupa-nya orang itu y kelipkan-lah mata. Beta 
hingga yang di-pertuan sa-orang jua tuan-ku 

836. lain rupa-nya : lit. change their look, i.e. turn dangerous. 

837. ia pegawai tuan-ku : Sang Stia was in no sense a pegawai 
of the Sultan of Pahang: but Pateh Ludang could be so described 
and surely the word mernbunoh has been omitted by error before 
pegawai ? 

838. Kama adinda . jangan demikian: obscure as it stands. 

To make sense some such word as sa-patut-nya is required before segera 
tuan-ku turun and I would read the passage j as follows:— 

Kama adinda . mengantarkan dia t benar-kah demikianf 

Lagi , tuan-ku.. .membawa Sang Setia , ( sa-patut-nya ) segera 
tuan-ku turun... ikat-nya ini. Jikailau tiada tuanku menyuroh 
melepaskan, benar-kah demikian ? {Lagi-) lagi-nya jangan 
demikian. 

839. yang hamba itu. ..... junjong: the sense appears to be 'the 
good servant faithfully obeys his master, even if he has to suffer, still 
more so when the master loads him with favours.’ Were the state¬ 
ment in the positive, for jangan we should have baik: as it is in 
the negative {tiada melalui ), jangan is used. 


These notes refer to pages 223—225 of Winstedt’s romanized text: 
see footnote on page 205 antea . 

J952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 










ABBREVIATION and REFERENCES 

used in the Commentary above 


c. & s. 

Dictionary of the Malay Language, Clifford and 
Swettenham, 1894—1902 (letters A—G only, not 
completed). 

Hang Tuah 

Hikayat Hang Tuah, Malay Literature Series 3 

( 1917 ) 

Hkt. ‘Abd. 

Hikayat ‘Abdulla|h, M.L.S. 4 ( 1907 ) 

„ Awang Suong 

„ Awang Sulong, M.L.S. 5 ( 1914 ) 

„ R.R.P. 

„ Rajarrajia Pasai, JSBRAS No. 66 

„ Seri Rama 

„ Seri Rama, JSBRAS No. 71 

Leyden 

Malay Annals translated by John Leyden, 1821 

M. 

Dictionary of the Malayan Language, William 
Marsden, 1812 ^ 

Malay Sayings 

Malay Sayings, C. C. Brown (Routledge and 
Kegan Paul, 1951 ) 

Pantun Melayu 

Pantun Melayu collected by Wilkinson and 
Winstedt (M.P.H., Sigapore, 1914 ) 

P.M.S. 

Papers on Malay Subjects (Govt, of the F.M.S., 
see this journal, 1952 , 25, (1): 194 — 99 ). 

R.H. Kanun 

Risalat Hukum Kanun, ed. van Ronkel, Leden, 
1919 

Sh. 

Sejarah Melayu, ed. W.G. Shellabear, M.L.S, 9 
(chh. I—XVII, 1909 : chh. XVIII—end, 1930 ) 

R.O.W. 

Sir Richard Winstedt, K.B.E., F.B.A ., 

D. Litt. (Oxon ). (History of Malaya, JMBRAS r 
Vol. 13 , (I): The Malays, a cultural history^ 
Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1950 ). 

W. 

Malay-English Dictionary, R. J. Wilkinson, 1932 


Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



APPENDIX. A. 


Pp. 106—7 

The Jajvanese version printed in the Translation is as suggested by 
W.J.S. Poerwadarminta and Prof Teeuw. My own translation in each 
case is of the Malay explanation given in the text. 

For the following translations of the Jalvanese l am indebted to Dr., 
Hooykaas:—^ 

Onya surub tanggapana penglipur : saben dina katon parandene 
onaiig uga 

“Void” sireh: take it by way of consolation: although you see 
him every day, still you feel the pangs of love 

Iwer sang dara kabeh , dene Laksamana lumaku-lumaku , penjurit 
ratu Mctlayu 

All maidens were upset, as Laksamana was wandering to and fro^ 
warrior of the Malay raja 

Ayu-ayu anake wong pande wesi : para tan ayua 7 saben dina den- 
gurinda ! 

Of course the daughter of an iron-smith is beautiful: how could 
she not be pretty, daily being polished more and more ! 

Kaget wong peken (f pangkon) y dene Laksamana tumandang , Laksa¬ 
mana tumandang , penjurit ratu ing seberang 

Startled were the people (—women) in the miarket (? on their 
husbands' laps) as the Laksamana posed, warrior of the raja across the- 
water 

Tututana ! yen ketemu , patenana karo y ketelu jaruman , mara! 
Pursue him (the Laksamana) ! When you find him, slay him, 
and his mistress and the matchipaker as the third, come on ! 

Geger wong pasar dene Laksamana teka 7 Laksamana penjurit ratu. 
Malaka 

Upset were the people (women) at the market as the Laksamana 
came, the Laksamana warrior of the raja of Malaka 

Wis laliya kung 7 \lagiq kungku maning; sumbalinga lipur kung 7 ati 
saben gelak (balek ) kung 

Even if I forget my love, still my love comes back to me: even 
if there were consolation for (my) love, still my heart always turns it¬ 
self towards love 

Geger wong paseban dene Laksamana liwat 7 Laksamana liwat 7 pen¬ 
jurit ratu Malaka 

Upset were the men in the audience hall because the Laiksamana 
was passing, the Laksamana was passing, warrior of the Malay raija 

Den-urai rambut 7 den-tangisi : rambute milu tan di-remen 

Her hair she put in disorder: she wept for him: Even my 
hair is no longer liked by him 

Geger wong ing panggungan dene Sangkaningrat teka 

Upset were the people on the stage becajuse Sangkaningrat was- 

passing 

APPENDIX B, from Sir Richard Winstedt, not received in time- 
for publication in this Journal. (1:2:53) 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society . 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 




264 


The Malay Annals 



This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 





translated by C. C. Brown 


265 



This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 















INDEX 


Index of principal notes, names, incidents etc. 

The numbers are the numbers of the pages in the text. These will 
be found at the foot of the pages of the commentary. 

Achara, 163 

Adipati Kampar, 149, 219 
Ala^t Raja, 85 

Aria Bija 'diraja, see Tun Aria 
Aria Gajah Mada, see Pateh 
Awadana, see Sri Awadana 
Awi Dichu, 75, 96 

Badang, Sri Rana Wikerma’s strong man, 65 et sqq 
Baginda Mani Purindan, 88 
Bahara, 76 

Batara of Majapahit, 62, 81, 100, 135 
Batu Pahat, 97 

Bendaharai Lubok Batu (Tanah), Tun Pikrama, formerly Paduka Tuan, 
q. v.: becomes Bendajhara, 188: dies at Muar and known thereafter 
as Datok Lubok Batu, 193: succeeded by his son Tun Pikrama Wira, 
q.v. 

Bendahara Paduka Raja I (Tun Perak): made Bendahara, 96: ranked 
as one of the tiga orang bijaksana of his time, q 6: 114, 116, 119: kill¬ 
ing of his son Tun Besar, 125: sent to attack Pasai, 138: dies 145 

Bendahara Paduka Raja II (Tun Pikrama Wira s/o Bendahara Lubok 
Batu), 194, 207, 212, 214: succeeded by Paduka Tuan, q.v. 

Bendahara Paduka Tuan (Tun Isak, made Paduka Tuan, 194), 214, 215, 
216, 218 

Bendahara Puteh (Tun Perpateh Puteh), 145, 15,0, 159 
Bendlahara Sri Amar 'diraja 84, 89 

Bendahara Sri Maharaja, Tun Mutahir s/o Sri Nara 'diraja 116; becomes 
Temenggong, 122: becomes Bendahara, 159: his ability as adminis¬ 
trator, 159: a great dandy, 160: "grandest of all the Bendaharas:” 
160, 185: 180, 182: his daughter Tun Fatimah and Sultan Mahmud’s 
grudge against him over her, 183 s his wealth, 184: the affair of Raja 
Mendaliar, 185: killed, 187 

Bendahara Sriwa Raja: 89, 92-3 (the only suicide recorded in the S.M.) 

Bendahara Tambak, see Bendahara Paduka Raja II, 214 

Bendahara Tun Perpateh Permuka Berjajar (the first Bendahara), 62, 65. 

Bendahara Tun Perpateh Tulus, 65, 82 

Bendahari, Penghulu, see Sri, Nara ‘diraja 

Bendahari, The Treasury, 42, 81 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



translated by C. C. Brown 


267 


Bendarang, strong man of Perlak, 68 

Bentan, 59, 193 

Benakeleng, 217 

Bijaksana, 96 

Brunai, 118, 152, 200 

Bubunnya, 93 

Bunga mas, 217 

Champa, (chempa), 85, 134 
Champa Malaka, 137 
Chau Pandan, 97 

Chau Sri Bangsa, 176: became Sultan Ahmad Shah of Petani, 177 
Cheteria,, 45 

China, Emperor of, 51, 116, 118; 122 
Chiri, 86 
Chuki, 88 
Cock-fighting, 195 

Conversion to Islam: Haru, 72: Malacca, 84: Perlak, 72. Semudra (Pasai), 
73 

d’Albuquerque, 182, 191 

Datok Bongkok, see Sri Bija 'diraja 

Datok Lubok Batu, see Bendahara Lubok Batu 

Demang Lebar Daun of Palembang, 56 

Feringgi, see Portuguese 

Fitnah, 77 

Gangga Nagara, 49 

Garfish, see Swordfish 

Gempar, 105 

Glang Gui, 49 

Gunong Ledang, 130 

Hang ‘Esa (‘Isa), one of Sultan Mahmud’s favourites 152 , 

Hang Hamzah, 133 

Hang Hussain Chengang, one of Sultan Mahmud’s favourites, 152, 157 
Hang ‘Isa (Pantas), 157 
Hang Isak, 166 

Hang Jebat, Hang Kasturi and others, 104—114 

Ha^ng Nadim: his failure on his mission to Kalinga, 165—167: redeem¬ 
ed by his successful abduction of Tun Teja for Sultan Mahmud, 
169—173: he becomes Laksamana (III), 194 
Hang Tuah, 104—114, becomes Laksamana (I), q.v. 

Haru: converted to Islam 72; the embassy to Paisai where salam was read 
as semhah 145; unsuccessfully attacks Malacca 146: custom and 
Raja Pahlawan 214: ranked as equal with Malaka 85, 125. 
See also Sultan Husain (Haru) 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



268 


The Malay Annals 


Hujong Tanah, 123 
Hulubalang, 45 

Indragiri given to Sultan Mansur by Batara of Majapahit, up: Maha¬ 
raja Merlang taken to Malacca and married to Sultan Mansur’s 
daughter in: offspring of this marriage is Raja Nara Singa, q. v : 
the plight of the Indragiri captives in Malacca, 130, 165. See also 
Raja Nara Singa 

Jahiat, gg 
Jemput, 56 

Kadli Menawar (Menua) Shah, 129, 154, 157 
Kadli Yusuf (Maulana Yusuf), 129, 154, 157 

Kaiinga (benua Keling), 48: the building of Bija Nagara, 50: Talai 
Puchudi marries Ruler of Singapore, 65: Baginda Mani Purindan, 
88: Sultan Mahmud sends Hang Nadim to get cloth for him and 
the Kaiinga ^designers have difficulties, 165 

Kampar. 148, 159, 195,. 214, 219. See also Adipati 
Karas Bandan, 159 

Kedah, Raja of, visits Malacca to obtain recognition as ruler, 163 

Kelantan, ,158 

Keling, see Kaiinga 

Keraing Semenluki (Mengkasar), 126 

Khoja Husain, see Laksamana (II) 

Kerja raja, 93? 

Kittul: the affair of Raja Mendalir and Bedahara Sri Maharaja, 185: 
executed, 187 

Kota Miahligai (Patani), 176 

Laksamana (I) Hang Tuah), 104: made Laksamana by Sultan Mansur 
114 and described as 'the frst Laksamana', though there is men¬ 
tion of Tun ‘Ali Haru Laksamana on p.ioo: 119, 126, 131, 138, 

143,-147, 164, 167 

Laksamana (II) (Khoja Husain), 167, 174—6, 180: bribed by Raja 
Mendadiar to tell a false story about Bendahara Sri Maharaja to 
Sultan Mahmud who has the Bendahara executed, 186: his punish¬ 
ment when the falsity of the story is discovered 187: dies and 
subsequently known as Laksamana Pantau, 194 

Laksamana (III) (Hang Nadim), 165, 169, 173, 194, 199-203, 221 

Legur, 180 

Lenggui, 49 

Lingga, 165, 197—9 

Ma'abri, 71 

Maharaja ‘diraja (Haru), 145 
Maharaja Isak (Lingga), 197 
Maharaja Jaya (Kampar), 148 
Maharaja Merlang, see Indragiri 
Maharaja Sura (Pahang), 119 
Majapahit, see Batara 
Maka, 100, 144 


Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & ill 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



translated by C. C. Brown 


269 


Makhdum, see Maulana and Tun Makhdum 
Mak'kah* 71 

Malacca: founding of, 82: conversion to Islam, 84: development 

under Sultan Muhammad, 88: its fame (known to Arabs as 
Makikat), 125: (prosperity, 159, 181: first attack by Portuguese 
repelled, 182: falls to the Portuguese, 192 

Maluku (the Moluccas), Raja of, 141 
Mandulika of Klang, 219 
Mani Purindan, see Baginda 
Manjong, 78, 204 
Marhum Shaikh (Pahang), 176 

Marhum Kampar, see Sultan Mahmud (Malacca), 215 
Maijhum Malaka, see Sultan Mansur (Malacca), 215 
Maulana Abu Bakar, 127 

Mauilana Jalalu’d-din, contrives seizure of throne by Raja Kasim 
who becomes Sultan Muzaffar (Malacca), 91 

Maulana (Makhdum) Sadar Jahan, 177: Sultan Mahmud is his pupil 177: 
as is Sultan Ahmad, 190: his verbal encounters with Sri Rama, 177: 
and Tun Mai Ulat Bulu, 178: accompanies Sultan Ahmad into battle 
against Portuguese and does not like it, 191 

Maya, 76, 78 

Mecca, see Makkah 

Mengachara, 82 

Mentri Jana Putra, 98, 118 

Menawar Shah, Sultan (Kampar), see Sultan 

Mengempong, 48 

Mengenang, 112, 204 

Me rah Chaga (Pasai), 70 

Merah Silu (Pasai), 70 

Moga-moga, 50 

Nabi Khidlir, 43 

Naina Sura Dewana, 185 

Nobat, 50, 59 

Onang Kiu, 50 

Padang Maya, 78 

Paduka Raja (Tun Perak), 95: see Bendarara Faduka Raja 
Paduka Sri Maharaja (Singapura), 70, 80 
Paduka Sri Pikrama Wi'ra (Singapura), 62 

Paduka Tuan (Tun Pikrama), 131, 134, 146: becomes Bendahara 187: 
see Bendahara Lubok Batu and Tun Pikrama 

Paduka Tuan (II) (Tun Isak Berakah), 194, 200; 203; 205: becomes 
Bendahara, 214; see Bendahara Paduka Tuan: see also Tun Isak 
Berakah 

Pahang, invaded by Malacca 119: see also Sultans Abdul'l-Jamal, 
Mansur, Mahmud and Muhammad, all of Pahang 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



270 


The Malay Annals 


Pakaian, 43 

Paladutani (Sang Meniaka), 55, 56, 101 
Pasai, 70, 74, 125-^127, iy \ 9 145, 178 

Pateh Adam (Pengiran Surabaya), abducts daughter of Sri Nara ‘diraja, 
161 

Pateh Aria Gajah Mada (Majapahit), 96, 100 
Pateh Ludang, 224 

Pa>u Glang and Pau Gma (Champa), 135 
Penggang, 66 

Penghuilu Bendahari, see Sri Nara ‘diraja 

Penyadap, The 100 

Perasi, 132 

Perak, 216 

Peratunan, 42 

Perlak, 68 

Persalin, 43 

Petani (Patani), 176 

Portuguese (Feringgi): first visit to Malacca, 181: attack Malacca and 
defeated, 182: take Malacca 191: assist Kampar, 195: assist Lingga 
against Sultan Mahmud, 199: attacked at Malacca by Sultan Mahmud, 
200: Sang Naya's conspiracy, 220 

Proverbial sayings, 141 

Putri Genggang (Perlak), 73 

Putri Gunong Ledang, 130 

Putri Nai Kesuma (Majapahit), 101 

Radin Galoh Chendra Kirana, d/o Putri Nai Kesuma by the Batara of 
Majapahit, 104: married to Sultan Mansur (Malacca), no: ? mother 
of Sultan AlaVd-din (Malacca), see note on Raja Radin, p.137 

Raja AftabuI-ArdI, 53 

Raja Ahmad (s/o Sultan Mansur of Malacca), 124 

Raja Chulan, 51 

Raja Chulin, 49 

Raja Ibrahim, 90 

Raja Iskandar Dzu'l-Karnain, 43 

Raja Kasim, gp: becomes Sultan Muzaffar (Malacca), q.v. 

Raja Kechil Bambang, 83 , 

Raja Kenayan (Pasai), the: one of them described as one of the four 
outstanding men of the time, 96: another (?) of them shews bravery 
against Semerluki, 126 

Raja Kida Hindi, 43 
Raja Linggi Shah Johan, 49 

Raja Mahmud (s/o Sultan AlaVd-din I of Malacca): ailso mentioned 
as Raja Mamat: 139, 141, 149 (Raja Mamat), became Sultan Mah¬ 
moud of Malacca, q.v. 

Raja Menawar Shah (s/o Sultan AlaVd-din I of Malacca), 139: becomes 
Sultan Menawar of Kampar, 149 

journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



translated by C. C. Brown 


271 


Raja Muzaffar Shah ,s/o Sultan Mahmud of Malacca): designated to 
succeed his father on the throne but ousted by Raja Ala’u’d-din, 194: 
driven out when Raja Ala'u x d-din succeeds to the throne but is taken 
to Perak and made Sultan of Perak, 216 

Raja Muhammad (s/o Sultan Mansur of Malacca): exiled to Pahang for 
killing the Bendahara's son and made Sultan of Pahang, 125: see Sultan 
Muhammad (Pahang) 

Raja Nara Singa (Indragiri): born in Malacca, in: escapes to Indra- 
giri and made ruler, 165: shelters fugitives from Sultan Mahmud’s 
unsuccessful attack on Kampar 195: his feud with Lingga which he 
attacks, 197: visits Sultan Mahmud in Bentan, marries one of his 
daughters and is made Sultan ‘Abdu'l-Jalfl of Indragiri, 197: accom¬ 
panies Sultan Mahmud’s expedition against Malacca, 200: his 
quarrel with the Paduka Tuan, 203 

Raja Pahlawan (Haru): killed in Pasai because he would not accept the 
Pasai reading of sembah into the letter from Haru, 145 

Raja Perempuan (Malacca): the title given by Sultan Mahmud to Tun 
Fatimah, 190 

Raja Radin: see note under Sultan Mansur (Malacca) 

Raja Semudra, 75 
Raja Shulan, 48 

Raja Tanjong Pura, 56, 101 104 

Raja Tengah: converted to Islam, 83: becomes Sultan Muhammad of 
Malacca, q.v 

Raja Tua (mother of Sultan Mansur of Malacca): her designs on the 
life of Sultan Ala’u'd-din to procure the succession of her grandson 
Raja Muhammad (see above), 138 

Raja Zainal—’Abidin (brother of Sultan Mahmud of Malacca): hand¬ 
some rake mudered on his brother’s orders, 157 

Ramai, see terlalu 
Rekan (Rokan), 85 

Rekan, Raja of: visits Sultan Muhammad of Malacca and on the latter’s 
death stays on in Malacca as regent for Sultan Abu Shahid, 90: 
killed when Raja Kasim seizes the throne and himself kills Sultan 
Abu Shahid, 92 

Rampasan, 48 
Sa-bagai, 175 

Sadar Jahan, see Maulana 

Saidi ‘All Ghithayu’d-din (Semudra), 73 

Saidi Asmayu’d-din (Semudra), 73—79 

Saiyid ‘Abdul-'Aziz (Juddah), 84: described as converter of all Malacca 
to Islam, 129 

Saiyid (anon.), shot an arrow from Malacca and killed Chau Pandan in 
Siam, 98 

Saiyid (An)-al-Hak, 203 
Salam, 85, 98 

Sang Meniaka (Paladutani) made Raja of Tanjong Pura, 56 

Sang Naya, conspires against the Portuguese at Malacca and is killed, 
220 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society . 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



272 The Malay Annals 

Sang Ranjuna Tapa, betrays Singapore to the Javanese revenge for in¬ 
sult inflicted upon his daughter by Sultan Iskandar, 81 

Sang Sapurba (Bichitram) made Raja of Minangkabau, 56 
Sang Stia, 180, 199, 200, 212 

Sang Sura (Hang Berkat) murders Rajia Zainal-’Abidin for Sultan 
Mahmud, 158 and (acc. to Sh. text) was made Sang Sura for his 
services: faithful henchman of Sultan Mahmud in exile, 187-190 

Sang Utama (Nilatanam) made Raja of Palembang, 56 

Sapu-sapu ringin, 108 

Sembah, 93, 98 

Semerluki, see Keraing 

Semudra, 71 et sqq. 

Shaikh Isma’il, master of ship sent by the Sharif of Mecca to Semudra, 

7i 

Shahru’n-nuwi (Siam) 75 

Shaving of boy’s head with adze, 63 

Siak, 123, 143, 204 

Siam, 93, 96, 177: see also Shahru'n’-nuwi and Chau Sri Bangsa 
Siantan, no 
Sida-sida, 45, 115 

Singapura, founding of, 61: the attack by the swordfish, 80: taken 
by the Javanese, 81: fief of the Sri Bija 'diraja, 151 
Sireh puan, 94 

Sri Agar Raja (Tun Mahmud): made Sri Agar Raja by Sultan Mah¬ 
mud, 214,: sent to Selangor as governor, 216: Sultan Muzaffar of 
Perak calls him to Perak and makes him Bendahara, 216: this 
displeases Sultan AlaVd-din who sends for him, 218 , 

Sri Akar Raja (Pahang), 142 

Sri Amarat: herald to Sultan Muzaffar of Malacca: snubbed by Tun 
Perak, 94 

Sri Awadana (Udani, Sh.): chief minister to Sultan Mansur (Malacca), 
123: led expedition against Siak, 214 
Sri Awadana (II) (Tun Mai Ulat Bulu), 154: made Temenggong with 
title of Sri Awadana, 190: 191, 210, 214 
Sri Bijia (diraja (I) also mentioned as Sri Bijaya (dirajja) ): known as 

Datok Bongkok, 96: governor of Pahang, 119: 131, 145: dies, and 

succeeded by his son, 

Sri Bija 'diraja (II) who offends Sultan Mahmud, 150: is put to death, 

151 

Sri Nara ‘diraja (I) (Tun Perpateh Besar), Penghulu Bendahaii, 84 
Sri Nara 'diraja (II) (Tun ‘Ali), 89, 95, 96, 112, 122 
Sri Nara ‘diraja (III) (Tun Tahir, brother? of Bendahara Sri Maharaja): 
appointed, 122: 125, 148, 159, 161: murdered with Bendahara Sri 
Maharaja, 187 

Sri Nara ‘diraja (IV) Tun Hamzah, s/o S:ri Nara ‘diraja III): appointed, 
194: particular favourite of Sultan Marmud in exile and offered one 
of his daughters in marriage as reward for his services, 214 

Sri Rama Panglima Gajah, 151, 176: his quarrel, in his cups, with 

Maulana Sadar Jahan, 177 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



translated by C. C. Brown 275 

Sri Tri Buana (Sang Utama): ruler of Palembang, 56: visits Bentan,. 
59: founds Singapore, 61 

Sri Rana Wikerma (Singapore), 65—70 

Sriwa Raja, one of Sultan Mahmud’s chief favourites, despite his killing 
Tun Bayajit, 152: his habit of keeping the Sultan waiting, 152-3: 
defies Kadli Menwar Shar's odd sense of humour and wins his 
daughter, 154—5: his power over elephants and horses, 156: his ex¬ 
periences in Pahang, 168—9 

Sultan ‘Adu’l-Jallil (Indragiiri), see Raja Nara Singa 

Sultan ‘Abdu'l-Jamal (Pahang), 167: the episode of Tun Teja, 169: theft 
of the royal elephant by the Laksamana of Malacca, 174: retires in 
dudgeon, 176: known, after his death as M«arhum Shaikh 

Sultan ‘Abdul’lliaih (Kaimpar), grandson of Sultan AlaVd-din and son-in 
law of Sultan Mahmud of Malacca, 159: refuses to own suzerainty 
of Sultan Mahmud at Bentan and is attacked but invokes Portu¬ 
guese assistance effectively, 195: is however taken captive by the 
Portuguese and sent to Goa and thence to Portugal, 196 

Sultan Abu Shahid (Malacca), dies ‘marty: V death at the hands of Raja 
of Rekan, 90 

Sultan Ahmad (Malacca), 151: succeeds on abdication of Sultan Mahmud,. 
189: his young falvourites, 190: leads Malacca in resisting the Por¬ 
tuguese, 191: but Malacca falls and he flees to Bentan, 193: his 
behaviour offends ex-Sultan Mahmud who has him killed and him¬ 
self resumes the throne, 193* 

Sultan Ahmad (Pasai), 79 

Sultan Ahmad Shah (Petani) (Chau Sri Bangsa), 177 

Sultan AlaVd-din I (Malacca), succeeds his father, Sultan Mansur, 137: 
his illness and the attempt of his grandmother, Raja Tua, to take 
his life, 138: marries Tun Naj,a, d/o Sri Nara ‘diraja II, 139: his 
measures against thieves in Malacca, 139: humbles Pahang, 142, 
and Siak for acting without his authority 14^: conquers Kampar, 148: 
dies, 150 , 

Sultan AlaVd-din II (Malacca) (son of Sultan Mahmud by Tun Fati- 
mah): succeeds his father, 215: marries sister of Sultan Mahmud of 
Pahang, 217: established at Ujong Tanah, 217: conquers Merbedang r 
220: armistice with Portuguese, 223 

Sultan Husain (Haru): visits Bentan and marries Sultan Mahmud's 

daughter, Raja Puteh, 206—210: visits Sultan Mahmud in Kampar,. 
214 

Sultan Ibrahim (Siak), 124, 143 , 

Sultan Iskandar (s/o Paduka Sri Mahraja): succeeds to throne of 

Singapore, 81: but driven out by Javanese, 81: founds Malacca, 82- 

Sultan Khoja Ahmad (Siak), marries daughter of Sultan Mahmud of 
Malacca, 204 

Sultan Mahmud (Malacca): Raja Mahmud, 139, 141, 149 (Raja 

Mamat): succeeds his father, Sultan AlaVd-din, 150: the affair of 
Tun Bayajit, 151: his four favourites, 152: only loyalty to the ruler 
prevents injured husband killing him, 154: pupil of Maulana Yusut, 
157: conquers Kelantan and marries captive Kelantan princess, 169: 
the mission of Hang Nadim to India to buy cloth for him, 165; 
marries Tun Teja, 173: pupil of Maulana Sadar Jahan, 177: sends 

mission to Pasai with religious conundrum, 179: his grudge against 

J952] Roya] Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



274 


The Malay Annals 


Bendahara Sri Maharaja over Tun Fatimah, 183: kills Bendahara 
S.M. and Sri Sara 'diraja III, 187: marries Tun Fatimah, 189: abdi¬ 
cates in favou < of his son Sultan Ahmad, 189: takes up abode at 
Bentan, 193: has Sutan Ahmad murdered and resumes throne, 193: 
unsuccessfully attacks Kampar, 195: visited by Raja Nara Singa 
who becomes his favourite son-in-law, 197: unsuccessfully attacks 
Lingga, 199: and the Portuguese in Malacca, 199—204: visited by 
Raja of Siak, 204: by Tun Aria Bija 'diraja from the Western ter¬ 
ritory, 206; by Sultan Husain of Haru who marries his daughter 
Raja Puteh, 207—210: and by Sultan of Pahang, 210: Portuguese 
attack Bentan and he moves to Kampar, 214: where he dies, to be 
known thereafter as Marhum Kampar 

Sultan Mahmud (alias Muhammad) of Pahang: ? 210: 216: the letter 
sent to Siam and the wording of it, 217 

Sultan MalikuTMansur (Semudra), 73—79 

Sultan MalikuTSaleh (Merah Silu), ruler of Semudra, 72 

Sultan Maliku’tl-Tahir (Pasai): carried off to Siam captive, 75: recovered 
by his faithful minister, 77 

Sultan Mansur (Malacca): succeeds, iqo: goes to Majapahit and marries 
Batara’s daughter after various incidents in which Hang Tuah and 
other Malacca men give a good account of themselves, 104—110: 
the affair of Hang Tuah, in: and Hang Kasturi, 112: the new 
palace is built, 114: and burnt down, 115: marries daughter of Em¬ 
peror of China, 118: conquers Pahang, 119: attacked by Semerluki 
of Macassar, 126: pupil of Maulana Abu Bakar, 127: courtship of 
Putri Gunong Ledang, 130: dies and succeeded by Raja Radin 
(sic) presumably Raja Husain (Sh.) 137: referred to as Marhum 
Malaka, 164 

Sultan Mansur (Pahang): succeeds, 176: attacked by Legur, 180: but 
Malacca effectively assists, 181 

Sultan Megat (Malacca), only reigned for 2 years, 82—84 

Sultan Menawar (Kampar), s/o Sultan Ala’u'd-din I of Malacca: made 
Sultan of Kampar, 149: dies and is succeeded by his son ‘Abdullah, 
159 

Sultan Muzaffar (Malacca) (Raja Kasim s/o Sultan Muhammad): 
succeeds on death of Sultan Abu Shahid, 92: reigns for <0 years, 
92—100 

Sultan Muzaffar (Pahang), the affair of Sang Stia, 224, 

Sultan Muzaffar (Perak), son of Sqltan Mahmud of Malacca and de¬ 
signated as his successor, but Sultan Mahmud changed his mind in 
favour of Tun Fatim-ah’s son and Raja Muzaffar is driven out, 216: 
he becomes Sultan of Perak, 216 

Sultan Muhammad (Malacca): son of Sultan Megat, 82: his conversion 
to Islam and the subsequent conversion of Malacca, 83—4: insti¬ 
tutes court ceremonial, 84—88: dies, 90 

Sultan Muhammad (Pahang), Raja Muhammad, s/o Sultan Mansur of 
Malacca: banished to Pahang by hisi father after the murder* of Tun 
Besar, s/o Bendahara Paduka Raja, and made Sultan of Pahang, 
125: the affair of the Telanai of Trengganu and the rebuke from 
Malacca, 142 

Sultan Zainal-'Abidin (Rasai), his ingratitude to Malacca for restoring 
him to the throne, 131 

Surat Kaseh, 98, 217 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



translated by C. C. Brown 


275 


Surat sembah, 93 
Swordfish attack Singapore, 80 
Tambera, 216 

Tanjong Pura, 56: see, also Raja Tanjong Pura 
Temasek (Singapore), 51, 60 
Terlalu ramai, 64 

Telamai Trengganu, 141, see also Tun Telanai 
Temenggong, see Tun Hasan, Sri Awadana 
Tersebut-lah perkataan, 48 

Tun 'Abdul'l (s/o Sri Nara 'diraja> II), described as telalu olahan , 116, 122 

Tun ‘Ali s/o Bendahara Sri Amsar 'diraja) made Sri Nara 'diraja and 
Penghulu Bendaha:i, 89 

Tun Aria Bija 'diraja (Bruas) governor of the Western territory, sum¬ 
moned to Bentan, 204—6 

Tun Bayajit (s/a Laksamana I), injured husband who might have killed 
Sultan Mahmud but for his loyalty, 154 
Tun Bajyazid (s/o Bendahara Lubok Batu), his oddities and sense of 
humour, 188 
Tun Besar, 125 

Tun Biajid (s/o Hang Tuah and possibly the same person as Tun Baya¬ 
jit above), a great cock-fighter, 195 

Tun Bija Sura, accompanies Sultan Mansun to Majapahit and his ex¬ 
periences there, 104-no 

Tun Bija Wangsa, sent to Pasai on theological business, 127, 179 
Tun Fatimah, the beautiful daughter of Bendahara Sri Mahaaja who 
did not 'shew' her to Sultan Mahmud and the eby incurred the 
royal displeasure, 182: married first to Tun 'Ali by whom she had 
daughter, Tun Trang q.v., 183: then married Sultan Mahmud, 189: 
Raja Perempuan, 190: her son, Ala'u'd-din, ousts Raja Muzaffar 
from the succession, 194 

Tun Hamzah s/o Sri Nara 'diraja III, wounded but not killed when his 
father and Bendahara S. M. were murdered on Sultan Mahmud's 
orders, 187: became one of Sultan Mahmud's chief favourites and 
made Sri Nara Idiraja, 194 
Tun Hamzah, Sri Bija, 'diraja, 96 

Tun Hasan Temenggong (s/o Bendahara Sri Mararaja): his duties as 
Temenggong, 160: inventor of the long baju with wide sleeves, 1,60: 
commands Malacca force that defeated, Portuguese, 182: would have 
resisted by force the murder of his father but forbidden by his 
father to do so, 187 

Tun Isak Berakah (s/o Tun Rikrama Wira, Bendahara Paduka Raja II): 
his bravery in the attack on Haru, 146: his methods with the Sriwa 
Raja, 153, 156: his courage on the eve of the fall of Malacca, 192: 
presumably the Tun Isak who was made Paduka Tuan and subse¬ 
quently Bendahara Paduka Tuan, 194 
Tun Jana Fakil (Siak), 143 

Tun Jana Khatib (Pasai), his supernatural powers cost him his life 80 
Ttm Kudu, beautiful daughter of Bendahara Sriwa Raja: married to 
Sultan Muzaffar of Malacca* 93.: but given subsequently by him in 
marriage to Sri Nara 'diraja II:, 96: by whom she became the mother 
of Bendahara Sri Maharaja, 116 

Tun Mahmud (s/o Sri Nara 'diraja III), rescues Sultan Mahmud af er 
the fall of Bentan and is made} Sri Agar Raja, 214 

1952] Royal Asiatic Society. 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



276 


The Malay Annals 


Tun Mai Ulat Bulu: makes Makhdum Sadar Jahan look foolish, 178; 
one of Sultan Ahmad’s chief favourites, 190: made Temenggong, 
190: see also Sri Awadana 

Tun Makhdum Mua (Pasai), the divine appointed to answer the conun¬ 
drum sent to Pasai by Sultan Mansur, 128 
Tun Muhammad, grandson of Bendahajra Puteh and rated as, 'for a 
Malay’, quite a fair Arabist, 145: presumably chosen on that account 
for theological mission sent to Pasai, 178 
Tun Muhammad Pantas, 115 
Tun Muhammad Unta, 115 
Tun Mutahir, see Bendahara Sri Maharaja 

Tun Nara Wangsa (s/o Sri Nara 'diraja III): his assistance to Sultan 
Mahmud on the flight from Bentan, 213-: made Temenggong, 214 
Tun 'Omar ('Umar), s/o Sriwa Raja, victim of Sultan of Pahang’s odd 
sense of hospitality, 169 

Tun 'Omar, s/o Sri Bija 'diraja (Datok Bongkok): one of Sultan Mah¬ 
mud’s chief favourites, 152: his reckless bravery, 157: possibly the 
Tun 'Umar who is made Sri Petam, 194 
Tun PeRerma, see Benda/hara Sriwa Raja: Tun Perak, s/o Bendahara 
Sriwa Raja his effective retorts to criticism of his conduct as Penghulu 
Klang, 94—-5, win the approval of Sultan Muzaffar who makes him 
Paduka Raja and subsequently Bendalhara 95: see Bendahara Paduka 
Raja I 

Tun Perpateh Pandak (Perlak); sent to Singapore with the Perlak 
strong man Bendarang and his diplomatic handling of the situation 
there, 68—70 

Tun Perpateh Puteh, s/o Bendahara Sriwa Raja, 93: his outstanding 
success as envoy to China, 117: see Bendahara Puteh 
Tun Pikrama, s/o Bendahara Paduka Raja: his bravery on the 
Pasai expedition, 13*—33: rewarded by being made Paduka Tuan 
134: leader of Malacca against the attack from Haru 146: made 
Bendahara, 187: see Bendarara Lubok Batu 
Tun Pikrama Wira, s/o the above: becomes Bendahara Paduka Raja II 
Tun Tahir, see Sri Nara ‘diraja III 

Tun Teja, beautiful daughter of Bendahara of Pahang, successfully ab¬ 
ducted for Sultan Marmud by Hang Nadim, 169—173 
Tun Telanai, 98, 118, 214 

Tun Trang, d/o Tun Fatimah by her first husband Tun 'Ali, 183: 
married to Raja* Muzaffar, 194: expelled with her husband (called 
Raja M’ud'a), 216: he becomes Sultan of Perak and she bears him 
16 children, 216 
Tun ‘Umar, see Tun 'Omar 
Tunggal (Tungkal), 104, 219 
Umpamakan, 164 

Wan Empok, one of the two widows whose huma on Bukit si-Guntang 
Mahameru was the scene of the miraculous descent from heaven of 
Sang Sapurba, Sang Meniaka and Sang Utama, 54—56. 

Wan Malini, as for Wan Empok, above 

Wan Sendari, daughter of Demang Lebar Daun, who made her marriage 
to Sri Tri Buana conditional on the latter giving a Malay Magna 
Carta, 57—8 

Wan Sri Benian (Bentan), the only female ruler mentioned in the 
Sejarah Melayu, 59. 

Journal Malayan Branch [Vol. XXV, Pt. II & III, 1952] R.A.S, 


This content downloaded from 128.103.149.52 on Sun, 18 Oct 2015 20:02:14 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 



