"The Book Of The Marvels Of India"
See other formats
UNIVERSAL 

LIBRARY 


OU 214187 


UNIVERSAL 

LIBRARY 





OSMANIA UNIVERSITY LIBRARY 

Call No.£? ^ 7 Accession Ncy/ £ / £ 6 

Author v/'C j 

Title /b-thrfc /£< C ^ 'LAxChI^ 

Jf A. 2 tfi. 

This book should be returned on or before the date 


last marked below. 






THE GOLDEN DRAGON LIBRARY 
Edited by C. EGERTON 



The Wiles of Women 

Turkish Stones 

Collected by J. A. DECOURDEMANCHE 

The Porcelain Junk 

A Romance of the Southern Ocean 
By J. DELTEIL 

The Book of the Marvels of India 

Arabian Travellers’ Tales 
By BUZURG IBN SHAHRIYAR 

The Shoji or Sliding Screen 

By KIKOU YAMATA 
Other volumes in preparation 

+§ 5 ®. 

GEORGE ROUTLEDGE & SONS LTD. 



The Book of 
the Marvels of India 

From the Arabic by 
L. MARCEL DEVIC 


LONDON 

George Rout ledge <& Sons, Ltd. 
Broadway House, Carter Lane, E.C. 

1928 



Translated into English by 
PETER QUENNELL 


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY 
WILLIAM BRENDON AND SON, LTD., PLYMOUTH 



At a period when Englishmen were still well 
content to keep their own shores , and the adventurous 
traditions of a seafaring people had still to he 
founded, Arabic and Persian sailors, in their frail 
craft, were venturing down the Persian Gulf, over 
the Indian Ocean , threading their way through the 
archipelago of the Indies towards the coasts of China, 
reaching, it may have been, even Japan. 

The Arabs of those days were inveterate travellers 
and skilled geographers ; they have left us works of 
travel which, in respect of accuracy and veracity, have 
little to yield to their European successors in later 
times. Put in this Book of the Marvel s of India we 
have rather a collection of those “ Travellers' Tales ” 
with which the returned sailors doubtless regaled 
those whom the Tates destined to a less adventurous 
life at home. We find in it an entertaining medley of 
fables and utterly fantastic stories, parallels to 
which tnay sometimes be found in other and better- 
known relations, but in many of the tales there is an 
element of truth which renders them not without 
value to those interested in the maritime exploits of 
an earlier and simpler age. 



EDITOR’S NOTE 

The hook was written , we are told, fully a thousand 
years ago by Buzurg ibn Shahriyar of llur/uu^, 
and the manuscript from which L. Marcel Devic 
made his Trench version dates hack to the NUIth 
century . It is, or was, preserved in the Library of 
Saint Sophia at Constantinople. 


VI 



THE BOOK OF 

THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


l A THE A A ME OF COD. THE 
M ER Cl FI L AND COMPASSION A TE 
IN mi OM IS M2' OMT RE/CCE 


lessed be God, to whom is the 
kingdom, the nower and the 


m kingdom, the power and the 

glory. liberal and benevolent, 
y^who has created divers peoples 
y fey Sx^y gg^fand nations ; who, in his creative 
might, lias allotted them their 
nature and outward semblance, who, in his 
power, has ordered their rise and fall, and 
who, in his wisdom, has shown them the dread 
works men must accomplish. Cunningly does 
he build, establish, direct, and restore. 

He has said, the most truthful of those who 


speak : “ Read : Thy Lord is the most 

generous of benefactors, and, by the pen, has 
shown mankind things it knew not ” (Koran, 
ch. xevi). 

His prodigies scattered through the universe, 
his marvels by land and sea, his excellent work 
through every part of the world, bear witness 
that the Creator — Blessed may he be ! Exalted 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


may he be ! — is the One, Eternal, Unmatched, 
Victorious. Take heed, ye men of clear sight ! 

He has sent his Prophet, Mohammed, to teach 
all living creatures where lies the truth and how 
it may be worshipped. God keep him and his 
family, as long as ever the lightning shall flash 
and the sun rises out of the East. 

God — Blessed be his name and remembered 
with praise ! — has divided the marvels of his 
creation in ten parts, nine to the pillar of the 
rising sun, and but one to the three other 
pillars, which arc those of the quarter of the 
setting sun, and the North and the South. And, 
of the nine parts given to the quarter of the 
rising sun, eight belong to India and China, 
and a single part to the rest of the East. 


7 Now, touching India, this is 

what was told me at Basra by Abou-Mohammed 
el-Hosei'n, son of Amr, son of Hamouia, son 
of Haram, son of Hamouia. 

“ In the year 288 ”, he said, “ 1 was at 
Mansoura. A respectable person of that town, 
a man worthy of credence, told me that, in 270, 
the King of Ra, whose name was Mahrouk, son 
of Raiq, most powerful of the monarchs of 
India, possessing a territory which lies betwixt 
High and Low Cashmere, wrote to the prefect 
of Mansoura, Abdallah, son of Omar, son of 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


Abd-cl-Aziz, to ask for an Indian translation of 
the laws of Islam. 

Abdallah communicated this request to a man, 
who at that time happened to be staying in 
Alansoura, a native of Iraq, a being of superior 
wit and fine intelligence, a poet too, and one 
who had been brought up in India and under- 
stood its various tongues. This man put into 
verse all that is necessary for the understanding 
of our faith, and his work was sent to the King, 
with whom it found such favour, that he 
begged Abdallah to send the author to him. So 
the poet was sent, and stayed there three years. 
Afterwards he returned to Alansoura. The 
prefect questioned him about the sovereign- 
prince of Ra. ‘ When I left him ’, he said, 

‘ the King was already a Alusulman, both in 
heart and lips. But, fearing he might be dis- 
possessed of his power, he would not profess 
Islam openly. He bade me translate the Koran 
into Indian for him, which I did. And when 
I had come to the verse, called Ya-Sin, and I 
was translating to him the word of God : 

‘ Who is it gives life to rotten bones ? Reply : 
He who first fashioned them, whose wisdom 
comprehends the whole of creation ’, sitting 
upon a golden throne, inlaid with precious 
stones and with pearls of incomparable value, 

‘ Repeat that ’, he said, and I repeated it, and 
straightway down from his throne he got and, 
pacing to and fro over the earth which had been 
watered and was still damp, presently he laid 

3 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 

his cheek against the ground and wept, so that 
his face was smirched with mud. ‘ Yes ’, he 
said to me, ‘ it is him we ought to adore, the 
Master, who was in the beginning, the ancient 
of days, he who has no peer ’ ! The King had 
built him a closet, where he used to retire, 
pretending weighty business, but, in reality, 
to offer secret prayers, unknown to any. 
Thrice he favoured me with presents, which 
amounted to six hundred pounds of gold ” 


II The same informant told me 

that the inhabitants of High Cashmere hold a 
festival-day each year, when they meet to- 
gether ; and their minister, holding in his hand 
a vessel of unbaked clay, ascends the pulpit, 
performs his office and says : “ See this brittle 
vessel of clay. It is cared for, and so intact. Do 
you also watch over your souls and your 
worldly goods, and keep them intact ”. Tradi- 
tion has it, that this vessel is four thousand 
years old. 


Ill T have it from Abou-Abdallah 

Mohammed, son of Balishad, son of Haram, 


4 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


son of JIamouia, citizen of Siraf, who, in his 
time, was famous among the ship-captains who 
go to the gold-hearing countries, most know- 
ledgeable of God’s creatures, where things of 
the sea are concerned, a distinguished sailor 
and an honest man, 1 have it from him, I say, 
that there is in the valley of Serendib, in a 
country named Abrir, a great city, which 
numbers some thirty markets or more, some 
of them at least half a mile long. Here are 
gobbiya fabrics, beautiful and of great price. 
The town is built on the banks of a large river 
which flows into the sea of pobbs. The inhabi- 
tants have about six hundred principal pagodas, 
without counting the little. The extent of the 
city is nearly four hundred berids. 

Beyond the town is a mountain, at the base of 
which is a spring, and, on the mountain-side, is 
an enormous tree, all of brass and bronze, 
bristling with thorns, like huge needles or like 
skewers. Fronting the tree stands a big idol, 
represented as a Blackamoor, with topaz eyes. 
Every year, the inhabitants hold a solemn 
festival round this image. Thither they go, 
climb the mountain, and whosoever wishes to 
find favour with his Lord, drinks, sings, makes 
frequent prostrations before the idol, then, 
down from the mountain-peak hurls himself 
upon the brazen tree, and is torn to shreds by 
its thorns. And others there are, who dash 
themselves head first against the rock, over 
which flows the spring, below the black idol. 

t 



THE MART 'ELS OF INDIA 


The poor wretch is crushed against the stone, 
and from the water passes into hell-fire. 


IV The same narrator has assured 

me, that in India, at Fetouh, there arc women 
who take an areca nut in a certain place between 
their lips, and crack it by squeezing them 
together. 


V He also told me that Mardouia, 

son of Zeraikht, one of the sailors who go to 
China and the gold-bearing countries, used to 
relate how, voyaging one day within the con- 
fines of the Isle of Rih, he sailed between two 
eminences, jutting out of the sea, which he took 
for the peaks of two submarine mountains, but 
that, when he had passed, they sank back again 
into the water ; and Mardouia realised that they 
were the two pincers of a crab. 

Whereupon, I said to Abou-Mohammed : 
“ Who told you that story ? ” “With my own 
ears I heard it,” he replied. “ It was an extra- 
ordinary thing to happen, of course ; and what 
comment to make, I don’t know, unless I add 
that, in the sea, crabs do often attain to a pro- 
digious dimension”. 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


VI Another sailor to the gold- 

bearing countries, Ismail, son of Ibrahim, son 
of Mardas, who generally went by the name of 
Ismail ouia, son-in-law of Ashkatin, told me 
that during one of his voyages to the gold- 
countries, some mishap which befel the ship 
obliged him to put in near Lameri. Wishing to 
moor the ship, he bade drop the great anchor ; 
but the ship, they knew not why, continued its 
course. Then the captain said to the diver : 
“ Go down the anchor-cable and see what is 
the matter And the diver, making ready to 
go down, looked under water ; and there was 
the anchor, between a crab’s claws, the crab 
playing with it and dragging the ship along. 
The sailors shouted and flung stones into the 
water. They hauled the anchor up, that they 
might drop it elsewhere. Now the anchor 
weighed six hundred pounds and more. 


VII According to the story com- 

municated to me by Abou-Mohammed el- 
Hassan, son of Amr, a ship’s-captain told him, 
that, being set out for Zabedj on a ship which 
belonged to him, the wind drove them towards 
the isles of Waqwaq, where they were obliged 
to put in not far from a village. Seeing them, 
the inhabitants fled into the country, carrying 

•7 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 

off such of their property as they were able. 
Those on ship-board, ignorant of the country 
and not knowing to what cause they ought to 
attribute the inhabitants’ flight, dared not go 
ashore. So there the ship stayed two days, and 
still no one approached the ship or made any 
parley. At last, a sailor, who understood the 
Waqwaqian language, was put over the side, 
and ventured through the town, on his way 
towards the open country. Lighting on a man, 
hidden beneath a tree, he addressed him, 
offering him some dates which he carried. 
Why had the natives all taken to their heels, he 
asked, promising that no harm should come to 
him, and that it should be worth his while if he 
told the truth. 

The fellow replied that, seeing the ship, the 
inhabitants thought they were going to be 
attacked and, with their king, had run off into 
the open country and the forest. He agreed to 
follow the sailor to the ship. Three com- 
panions were allotted him, charged with a fair 
message to the king, and also bearing a 
present, of two pieces of stuff, some dates, and 
various trifles. 

Reassured, the king came back with all his 
people. The sailors took up their lodging 
amongst them, and began bartering with the 
cargo of the ship. 

But the twentieth day had not yet gone by, 
when up came another tribe to attack the first. 
“ They are coming, you see ”, explained the 

8 * 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 

townspeople’s king, “ to harry me and pillage 
my goods, because they imagine I have laid my 
fingers on the ship’s cargo. So do you help me 
against them ; help me by helping yourselves 

At dawn, continued my narrator, the enemy 
was at the town gate, ready for battle. And the 
king and his men issued to meet them, sup- 
ported by as many able-bodied men as the 
ship’s company could muster and such of the 
merchants as were inclined for a fight. Battle 
was joined, but, in the press, a sailor, a native 
of Iraq, drew from his girdle a sheet of paper, 
on which was written a bill owing to him, and, 
unfolding it, held it up towards the sky, 
declaiming certain words at the top of his voice. 

The attackers saw it, and straightway paused. 
Some ran up to him, crying : “ No more of 
that, for God’s sake ! We’ll go quietly ! We 
won’t touch anything ! ” And one to another 
they exclaimed : “ Give over, give over fight- 
ing ! Our enemies have put their quarrel in 
God’s hands. We shall be beaten and cut to 
pieces ”. And they bowed down before the 
sailor, till he had tucked the paper away again, 
and presently withdrew, using the most humble 
language. 

Thus rid of them, my informant went on, we 
returned to our usual business of buying and 
selling. The king was all ours. We never 
stopped swindling the natives, stole their 
children, bought them from their fellows, 
with loin-cloths, trinkets, and dates, and so 


9 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


prospered that we had finally stocked our ship 
with an hundred head of slaves, big and little. 

Four months passed, and now the time of 
departure drew in. The slaves we had bought 
or stolen said to us : “ Don’t take us away ! 
Leave us here ! It is not right to carry us 
off into slavery, and separate us from our 
families But much we cared ! On board, 
they were chained up, some manacled by the 
feet and others bound with cords. Five men of 
the crew stayed on board, to guard them and 
tend the ship. One night, the prisoners hurled 
themselves on the guard, bound them, hauled 
up the anchor and set sail, stealing our ship 
under cover of darkness. Morning came, and 
it had gone. There we were stranded, reduced 
for sole property and provision to what poor 
odds and ends we had left in the town. 
Nothing could be heard of the ship. Many 
months we had to stay there, till we had built 
a light skiff which would bear us, and then 
embarked, in the utmost destitution. 


VIII Ahmed, son of Ali, son of 

Mounir, the ship’s captain, a native of Siraf, 
another of those far-famed sailors who scour 
the seas and bring home glory and renown, has 
informed me that a respectable person of India 
once told him the following story. A ship 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


was wrecked in the neighbourhood of Serendib, 
and certain of the company, escaping in the 
longboat, landed upon an island off the coast of 
India. There they stayed some time and, many 
of them dying, their number was at length 
reduced to seven. But, in the meantime, they 
had noticed a gigantic bird settle on the island, 
pick up its food and fly away again towards the 
evening, though whither it flew they could not 
discover. This observation led them to con- 
sider a plan ; and their plan was, that, in turn, 
they should each of them tie themselves to the 
bird’s shank and let themselves be carried off, 
so tedious was their exile and so powerless they 
seemed to avoid death. Only the bird 'could 
rescue them. Supposing it should dropThem 
near an inhabited district — that was _ their 
hearts’ desire ; supposing it killed them, that 
would hardly be a change for the worse. 

So, one of the castaways hid himself among 
the trees and, when as usual the bird lighted to 
feed, and a moment before it took flight, he 
slid quietly towards it and was handy enough 
to catch hold of its shank and lash himself in 
place with strands of fibrous bark. Away flew 
the bird, lifting him high into the air, and, 
with the man clinging there, his legs crooked 
round the creature’s shank, crossed an arm of 
the sea and, presently, at sunset, settled upon 
a mountain. The man loosed himself and 
tumbled to the ground, half-dead with fatigue, 
utter exhaustion, and terror, and lay motion- 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


less till the next day dawned. Then he rose, 
looked about him and caught sight of a 
shepherd, whom he addressed in the Indian 
tongue and asked the name of his whereabouts. 
The shepherd named a city of India, and gave 
him a drink of milk. Eventually he gained 
the city. 

As for the other six castaways, one after 
another they were taken off by the same means 
and, at last, all of them foregathered in that 
same city. Thence they gained a seaport, took 
ship and, returning home, told the strange 
story of their shipwreck and of the bird. As 
for the distance, which the bird covered, 
betwixt the island and the mountain where it 
dropped them, it was estimated at more than 
two hundred parasangs. 


IX Touching this matter of mon- 

strous animals, Aboul’-Hassan Mohammed, son 
of Ahmed, son of Amr, of Siraf, tells me that, 
in the year 300, he saw at Oman, a fish, which 
the sea had washed up and left on the beach. 
It had been taken and hauled along some dis- 
tance. The Emir Ahmed, son of Helal, visited 
it on horseback with his troops, among a 
great concourse of people who had collected 
to view the monster. So huge was it, that a 
horseman rode into one side of its jaws and out 

A 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 

at the other. It was measured and its length 
found to be more than two hundred ells and 
its thickness, from top to bottom, fifty. Oil 
was drawn from it and sold, as the report goes, 
for a sum, amounting to ten or twenty thousand 
dirhems. 

The ship’s captain, Ismailou'ia, has informed 
me that this fish abounds in the sea of Zindj and 
in the Ocean of Herkend. It is called Wak, and 
amuses itself by ramming ships. When sailors 
encounter it, they do their best to frighten it 
away by shouts, by beating drums and thump- 
ing together two pieces of wood. Each time it 
blows water, you see a spout rise tall as a light- 
house, and from the distance, you would swear 
it was the sail of a ship. Also, when it frolics 
with its tail and flukes, you might take it for 
some great ship under sail. 


X I have heard tell by a man of 

Iraq that he had seen in Yemen, at the house of 
one of his friends, a fish’s head, whence the 
flesh had perished, leaving the skull intact. He 
was able to walk in at this eye-socket and walk 
out at that, without bending his head. In the 
year 310, the jawbone of one of these fishes 
was brought from Omani to the Caliph 
Moqtadir. It had afforded more than five 
hundred casks of oil. 

t . 3 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


XI According to a story told me 

by Abou-Mohammcd el-Hassan, son of Amr, 
a sailor related in his hearing, that, while he 
was on a ship, going from Aden to Jeddah, a 
fish ran so violently against the hull of the 
vessel, that they were all persuaded it must 
have made a hole. However, the sailors, who 
went down into the hold, reported no more 
water there than usual, and they were extremely 
surprised that such a terrific blow should have 
left no trace. But, when they had arrived at 
Jeddah and the cargo had been discharged, the 
ship was beached and there, stuck in the ship’s 
side, they discovered the fish’s head, neatly 
bunging the aperture it had made. After the 
collision, the creature had found itself unable 
to withdraw its head ; and its head had been 
severed from its body, and remained fixed in 
place. 


XII The same informant tells me 

that he has often seen a fish caught and opened, 
and smaller fishes found in its belly, and in 
their bellies still others. This comes of fishes 
swallowing littler fishes, who have themselves 
been swallowing their kind. 


1 4 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


XIII Among other curious pieces of 

information, Mohammed, son of Balishad, son 
of Haram, tells me that he happened to be in 
Siraf, at a time when there was general anxiety, 
regarding the fate of a ship, which some time 
since had set out for Basra and of which there 
was no news. Recently many shipwrecks had 
occurred, and everyone took an interest in 
any news from sea. This ship was carrying a 
numerous company, sailors and others as well, 
besides a rich cargo. Now a woman had been 
out buying fish, and, cleaning one of them, 
found in its belly, a signet-ring. On examina- 
tion, she recognised it as belonging to her 
brother, who had also embarked upon the said 
ship. She gave a scream of despair. The news 
spread, and presently every house, whose 
inmate, friend, kith or kin was on board the 
ship, became a scene of mourning. And it was 
not till several days later that they heard that 
the vessel had indeed been shipwrecked and 
not a soul escaped. 


XIV A pilot informs me that, in 

the neighbourhood of Yemen, his ship was 
followed for a day and two nights by a fish 
which accompanied them without ever out- 
stripping the vessel or dropping behind. The 

* 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 

course they ran together was estimated at more 
than seventy parasangs. This fish was as long 
as the ship, which measured fifty ells, as the ell 
is usually estimated, that is to say from the arm- 
pit to the end of the middle finger. 

I asked him what was it made these creatures 
follow and run races with ships. “ They have 
different reasons ”, said the pilot. “ Some 
there are who follow a ship, because they hope 
to profit by this or that falling out. Previously 
they have happened upon a shipwrecked 
vessel and been able to regale themselves ; so 
every vessel they see inspires in them the 
expectation of a like feast. The pursuit of ships 
becomes a habit. Again, there are others, 
astounded by the sight of a ship, which they 
imagine to be an animal, swimming half in and 
half out of the water, who try to race it, from 
sheer good-humour and a spirit of friendly 
rivalry, till they give up, exhausted ; for all 
animals have not the patience of the ass. Yet 
others persist doggedly in their race with the 
ship, and when they find themselves exhausted, 
beaten, outraced by this mysterious creature, 
they make a last furious effort and hurl them- 
selves straight against it. Our vessel may with- 
stand the collision . . . and if not, God help 
us ! And sometimes the angry fish is merciless 
in its attack, and strikes time after time till it 
has capsized the ship. Other fishes, again, take 
fright and flee at the appearance of a ship. In 
fact, their behaviour varies with the region of 

6 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


the sea in which they dwell, whether it is near 
a populated coast and on routes frequented by 
travellers and fishermen, or whether it is in 
distant, unexplored seas, in the profundity of 
ocean, far from islands or mainland. The 
world of the ocean depths is, indeed, another 
world Blessed be God, the excellent 
Creator ! . . . 


X]'' Here is the story, told me about 

the island of women by the nakhoda , Abou’z- 
Zahr el-Barkhati, an important personage of 
Siraf, who had it from one of the women 
inhabiting these islands. Previously he had 
been a fire-worshipper, following the practice 
of the Indians. His word was generally 
respected and every man was ready to entrust 
him with his property and the lives of his 
children. At last he embraced the religion of 
Islam, made an excellent Musulman and accom- 
plished his pilgrimage. A man, so he told me, 
set out in a large ship that belonged to him, 
carrying a company of merchants of many 
different nations. Arrived at the sea of Malayou, 
they drew near the confines of China and had 
already caught sight of some mountainous 
eminence of the land, when a sudden and 
frightful wind sprang up, blowing against the 
vessel’s course, so violent that there was no 



THE MARVELS' OF INDIA 


withstanding it, while the fury of the waves put 
steering quite out of the question. The wind 
drove them towards Canopus. Now whoever, 
in those seas, is blown so far that Canopus stands 
right overhead, let that man abandon all hope 
of return. He is hurried along upon a mass of 
water, rushing towards the South ; and, as the 
ship proceeds, the waves are heaped up behind 
him, — on our side, that is to say, — and, on 
the other side, the flood declines before him. 
Thus, whatever may be the wind, whether it be 
fair or foul, all way of escape is shut, and the 
current draws him down across the immensity 
of the ocean. 

When the ship’s company saw that they were 
rushing towards Canopus, and night had come 
on, and they beheld thick darkness all around, 
powerless to steer a course, they despaired of 
their lives. Now the might of the waves would 
swing them almost to the clouds and now it 
plunged them in the abyss. All night they 
suffered dense fog, on a pitch-black sea, and 
when dawn came, they saw it not, for the 
darkness encompassing them and the fog which 
clung to the inky surface of the water, the 
ragings of the wind and the trouble and confu- 
sion of the sky. And through this long night, 
hopeless of their safety, given over to the fury 
of the tempest, upon a boiling sea, buffeted by 
fearful waves, their vessel bounding, plunging, 
quivering, creaking, the passengers bade one 
another good-bye and severally each man 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


invoked the power of the deity he served ; for 
there were among them men of China, India, 
Persia, and from the Isles. That done, they 
made up their minds to die. 

Thus passed two days and two nights, though 
night from day they could not tell. And about 
the middle of the third night, they saw the 
horizon fronting them glow as with some 
stupendous fire. Terror seized on them ; and, 
addressing themselves to the captain, — “ Can 
you not see,” they exclaimed, “ this fearful 
glow that fills the horizon, towards which we 
are being driven ? See how it encircles us, and 
we had rather be drowned than burned. In the 
name of your god, make the ship founder and 
us with it in the depths of this gulf, amid this 
darkness, where, at least, each of us will finish 
beyond sight of his companions’ agony. Do 
as we ask and you are quit of what befalls us. 
These last nights and days, have we not died a 
thousand-thousand deaths ? Is it not better to 
die once for all ? ” 

But the captain answered, “ You must realise 
that travellers and merchants run frightful 
dangers, dangers far worse than those that 
daunt you now. Besides, we pilots of the guild 
have to do our duty, and we swear to let no 
ship perish till its hour is struck. We pilots, 
when we go aboard a ship, there our life is 
and there our destiny : swim and we swim : 
sink and we sink with it. Have patience, trust 
yourselves to the good pleasure of the ruler 

1 9 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 

of wind and wave, who bridles the storm as 
he pleases 

Hearing the captain refuse their plea, the 
passengers wept, groaned, and bewailed their 
lot. In vain, might the captain bid the boat- 
swain give the crew such and such orders as 
the situation of the ship rendered expedient ; 
the roar of the sea, hubbub of the clashing 
waves, bellowing of the wind among the sails 
and cordage, and the lamentation of the 
passengers deafened their ears. And the vessel 
must have gone to the bottom, less by reason 
of the wind and sea, than by human fecklessness 
and the confusion which resulted. 

There happened to be in the ship a Musulman, 
native of Cadiz in Spain, who, in the press of 
embarkation, had escaped the captain’s notice 
and slipped on board the night they set sail. 
Whereupon he had stowed himself away in a 
retired corner of the ship, fearing the oppro- 
brium and ill-treatment he might receive did 
he show his face. But, when he saw how 
things stood with the ship, the dangers they 
were all running, and how the folly of man 
conspired with the fury of the waves against 
their common safety, he incontinently left his 
hiding-place, come what might of it, and, going 
up to his shipmates, “ What is it ? ” he 
demanded. “ l ias the ship sprung a leak ? ” 
They answered him, “ No ”. — “ Is the rud- 
der broken ? ” — “ No ”. “ Are you being 
swamped ? ” — “ No ”. “ What is the matter, 


20 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


then ? ” — “ Good Lord,” they replied, “ you 
talk just as if you weren’t here with us, on 
this ship 1 Can’t you see the fearful storm, the 
waves, the darkness which hems us in, hiding 
sun and moon, so that we cannot steer a 
course? And look, Canopus stands overhead, 
and we are the sport of winds and waves. But 
worse still is that fire towards which we are 
hurried along, which already fills the whole 
horizon. We had rather be drowned than 
burned, and we have begged the captain to let 
his ship founder, amid this darkness, which 
would hide us one from another, that we 
may die by water, and not by fire, with the 
added pain of watching our companions burn 
with us 

Said the stowaway, “ Take me to the 
captain Brought before him, he saluted 
him in the Indian tongue. The captain, 
surprised to see an unknown man, returned 
his salutation and asked him, “ Who are you, 
a merchant or one of their train ? We don’t 
remember you as one of the company who set 
sail with us ”. “ I am neither a merchant ”, 

the man replied, “ nor do I belong to their 
train — “ Why did you come on board, then, 
and what is it you sell ? ” the captain answered. 
“ Why ”, said he, “ I slipped in among the 
crowd, just as you were setting sail, and hid 
myself in a corner of the ship ”. — “ But how 
did you live ? ” — “ On a plate of rice, with 
butter in it, that one of your sailors set down 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


near my hiding-place every day, and a saucer 
of water too for the guardian angels of the 
ship. That was how I lived. As to what 
1 have brought to sell, it is a skin of crushed 
dates ”. 

All this mightily surprised the captain, while 
the passengers, diverted by the adventure, 
made an end of their distracted cries ; the 
crew went about its business ; at the voice of 
the boatswain, sails and rigging were put to 
rights, and the ship was once more got under 
control. “ Tell me, Captain ”, said the man 
from Cadiz, “ why were all these people crying 
and lamenting ? ” — “ Eh ! ” he replied, “ Can’t 
you understand these waves and winds and 
this darkness putting them to fright, and, 
worse still, the glow that fills the horizon, 
whither the storm is driving us ? Now I have 
scoured these seas ever since I was a child, 
when I followed my father who had sailed 
them all his life. 1 am already past my 
eightieth year, and I never yet heard tell of 
anyone who had seen the like of what we see 
now or had told of any such thing ”. — “ Be 
calm ”, said the stranger. “ By God’s grace, 
you shall all be saved. W hat you see is an 
island, closed in by a rim of mountains, the 
sea waves breaking against them. At night, it 
has the look of some tremendous fire and 
frightens the witless. But, as soon as the sun 
has risen, the apparition is no more and turns 
to water. This fire may be seen from Spain ; I 


22 



THE MARJ 'ELS OT INDIA 


have seen it there once, and now a second 
time 

At the stranger’s words, there was great joy 
through the whole ship, fears abated and panic 
was stilled; they ate and drank. And now (lie 
wind slackened and the sea grew smooth, and, 
with the rising sun, they drew near the island. 
The sky had cleared, and they reviewed the 
land and chose a good anchorage. The ship 
drew in, and all would get ashore. Down on 
the sand they flung themselves, and rolled upon 
the blessed earth, and not one soul was left 
aboard ship. 

But, in the midst of their joy, suddenly from 
the interior of the island there issued a horde of 
women, God knows how many, and fell on tire 
men, a thousand women or more to every one 
man, and carried them away towards the 
mountains and forced them to become the 
instruments of their pleasure. They fought 
among themselves without ceasing, and the 
sturdiest took her man. One after another, the 
men dropped off and died of sheer exhaustion ; 
and whenever a man died, they hurled them- 
selves upon him, none the less, caring nothing 
for the pestilential odour of his corpse. Only 
one man survived, and he was the Spaniard, of 
whom a single woman had taken possession. 
She visited him at night, and at dawn hid 
him away near the sea, bringing him food. 
Presently the wind changed and began to blow 
in the direction of India, whence the vessel had 

A 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 

come. The man lay hands on a little boat, 
called a felon , and, by night, stocked it with 
water and victuals. The woman, seeing his 
purpose, led him to a place where she turned 
back the earth and showed him a mine of gold 
dust. Together they loaded the boat with it, as 
full as it would hold. Then together they got on 
board, and, after ten days’ journey, reached 
that port from which the vessel had originally 
set out. There the man told his tale. 

The woman stayed with the Spaniard, learned 
his tongue, took the Musulman faith, and bore 
him several children. Questioned concerning 
the island and the women who dwell there, 
without the society of man, this was what she 
said : 

“ We come from a land, where are many 
great cities, encircling the island, the nearest 
being some three days’ and three nights’ sail 
distant. The inhabitants, royal as well as 
simple, worship the nightly fire which shines 
round the island. They call the island the 
House of the Sun, because the sun rises at its 
easterly tip and sinks behind the western shore ; 
and, as they believe, the sun spends the night 
in the island. In the morning, at dawn, the 
night-fire pales and dies out, and, straightway, 
the sun rises : ‘ Behold him, behold him ’, they 
cry, and they adore him, prostrating them- 
selves on the ground everyone and uttering up 
prayers. And thus it is when the sun goes down 
and the fire rises again. 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


You must know that it is God’s will, that the 
women of that land should be brought to Lied, 
first of a boy, then of twin girls, and so on for 
the rest of their lives. So it happened in our 
country, that there were few men and a super- 
fluity of women, and the women were desirous 
of ruling them. Then the men fitted out ships, 
thrust on board some thousands of women, and 
came to discharge them on this island, saying 
to their god, the Sun, ‘ What thou hast created 
is thine to dispose of ; for us, we have no more 
hand over them ’. 

So the women were left in the island, where, 
one after another, they died. Since we came 
there, we never set eyes on man. Not once has 
a man landed there. For our island is situated 
in the vastness of the sea, beneath Canopus. No 
traveller can land there and venture forth 
again ; none dares leave the shore and the 
security of dry land, fearing lest he be 
swallowed up in the sea. Thus has the All- 
Powerful willed it. Blessed be God, the most 
benign of Creators ”. 


XVI Captain Abou’z-zahra el-Bark- 

hati tells me the following story, which he had 
from his maternal uncle whose name was Ibn- 
Enshartou. “ I set out in a great ship which 
belonged to me ”, this uncle’s father used to 

A 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 

relate, “ and we directed our course towards 
the Isle of Qaisour. The wind drove us into a 
bay, where we stayed thirty-three days in a dead 
calm, without a breath of wind, on an un- 
rippled sea. We sounded, and found no bottom 
at a thousand fathoms’ depth. But, unsuspect- 
ing, we drifted with a current, till it had carried 
us among the islands. Towards one of these 
islands we steered, and there all along the beach 
were women, who swam and plunged and 
played. Making friendly gestures, we ap- 
proached them, but they fled into the island 
before our advance. Soon the natives accosted 
us, both men and women, who seemed 
extremely intelligent, but spoke an unknown 
tongue. We expressed ourselves with signs, 
and they did the like. We understood them and 
they understood us. ‘ Can you sell us food ? ’ 
‘Yes ’. And they brought us an abundance of 
rice, chickens, ewes, honey, butter, fruit, and 
other provisions. We paid them in iron, 
copper-ware, kohl, glass beads, and clothing. 
‘ Have you any other wares ? ’ we signed to 
them again. ‘ Only slaves ’. ‘Very well. Bring 
them here ’. And they confronted us with the 
most beautiful slaves we had ever seen, and 
the merriest, dancing, playing, frolicking, and 
fooling between themselves. Their bodies were 
plump and soft to touch as cream. So light 
they were and so lively that every moment, you 
thought, they were ready to take wing. Only 
their heads were tiny and, below their flanks, 

16 



THE MARVELS OT INDIA 

they had a kind of wing or fluke, like turtles. 
‘ What’s that ? ’ we asked the islanders. ‘ Don’t 
trouble yourselves ’, they answered, laughing. 
‘ All the islanders are made like that ’, pointing 
to the sky, as who should say : ‘ God created 
us thus ’. Without giving the matter any 
further consideration, £ Done ! ’ we cried, and, 
judging these slaves to be a good bargain, 
we bought of them, each according to his 
substance. We emptied the ship of merchan- 
dise, and stocked it with slaves and victuals. 
We had hardly purchased some, when they 
brought us others still fairer, and to such 
purpose that the vessel was populated with 
creatures, than whom the eyes had never seen 
lovelier or more graceful. And, if the bargain 
had turned out well, here was the wherewithal 
to enrich ourselves and our children’s children 
after us. 

But the hour of parting came, and the 
wind blew towards our native country. The 
islanders sped us on our way, remarking : 
‘ Please God, you will come back another 
time ! ’ And so we could have wished. The 
captain, also, wished he might return, but with 
an empty ship and unencumbered by merchants. 
And he passed the night, with his men, watch- 
ing the stars, noticing how stood the constella- 
tions, and so took his bearings and fixed in his 
mind the course to steer there and back. 

We were delighted, all of us, full of the 
liveliest pleasure. At daybreak, we sailed and 

2 } 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 

left the island with a favouring breeze. The 
island vanished from our eyes, and then what 
should some of our slaves do, but set about 
boo-hooing. That annoyed us. But up came 
other slaves, and ‘ Why make a to-do ? ’ they 
said. * Come ! Let us amuse ourselves ; let us 
dance and sing ! ’ And the whole company of 
them fell to dancing and singing, interrupted by 
laughter. So without giving them a second 
thought, we severally busied ourselves at our 
own affairs, and the slaves took advantage of 
our slackness and, choosing the propitious 
moment, away they sprang and cleared the 
deck like a flight of locusts. Fast as a light- 
ning flash was our vessel running, in front 
of a stiff gale, and the waves were mountain 
high. The fugitives were in the sea, and a 
parasang behind, before ever we knew the 
trick they had played us. We could hear 
them laughing, singing, and clapping their 
hands. Amid the violence of a stormy sea, 
they, at least, we understood, felt themselves 
perfectly at home, and, since we could by 
no means turn about, we gave up any hope 
of recapturing them. 

Thus of the entire cargo remained only one 
young she-slave who belonged to my father 
and whom he had shut up in a roomy cabin. 
My father ran down to the cabin and found the 
girl trying to tear her way out, that she also 
might fling herself into the sea. He seized and 
bound her. 


*8 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 

When our voyage was done, and we were 
once more in India, we sold such provisions 
as we still carried ; and, after we had gone 
shares, each man found his capital diminished 
to a tenth. The report of our adventure 
brought an old man to see us, who had been 
born in these islands, had been taken very 
young, and had subsequently remained in 
India. ‘ The islands where chance led you’, the 
old man told us, £ are called the Islands of the 
Fish. That is my native land. There men 
formerly coupled with the female of sea- 
creatures, and women gave themselves to the 
males of the same kind. From these unions 
were born a race of beings who shared the 
nature of both mother and father, and presently 
bred among themselves. Long has it been so. 
And we arc equally the natives of sea and 
land, dividing our ancestry between men and 
fish.’ 

But to go back to my father’s slave, — she 
bore him six children, of whom I was the sixth. 
He kept her eighteen years, but always tied up ; 
for the old man, who had revealed their 
mysteries, said : ‘ Let her loose, and she will 
fling herself into the sea and so good-bye.’ 
Water attracts us fatally. My father, then, 
took the old man’s advice. We grew up and 
our father died ; and, as we, without consider- 
ing the matter, had always blamed him for 
keeping our mother tied up, the first thing we 
did was to unbind her, from pity, respect, and 

*9 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


filial piety. Out of the house she flew, like some 
mare leading in a race, and we on her heels, but 
could not catch her. ‘ Where are you off to ’, — 
somebody cried, as she crossed them in her 
flight, — ‘ leaving your sons and daughters 
behind ? ’ ‘ Enshartou ’, she replied, which is 

interpreted : ‘ What have I to do with them ? ’ 
And, like the strongest of fishes, she flung 
herself into the sea. ‘ Glory be to the Creator, 
who brings forth and who ordains ! Glory be 
to God, the best of Creators ! ’ ” 


X1 / 1I Touching this matter of fish, 

Abou’l-Hassan, son of Amr, tells me : “ I have 
seen a fish’s rib, brought by some ship-master. 
Five ells length of it had been cut off and 
thrown over a stream, by way of bridge, at the 
gate of a garden which belonged to me in 
Djezira. The rest was twenty ells long ”. 

There is a kind of fish in the sea, against 
which no other fish can stand. It has a beak, 
resembling a saw, jagged on both sides. 
Should it strike a fish, it cuts its opponent clean 
in half. The natives of those coasts which it 
frequents, arm themselves with the beaks of 
such sword-fish as they take or find dead, and 
thus for their battles make weapons far deadlier 
than any sabre. 


3 ° 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


XJ'III A sailor, native of the seaports 

of Iraq, tells me the following story, which he 
had from an old ship’s-captain. His ship left 
Siraf, and he had a man on board who, during 
the voyage, fell out with one of the passengers, 
swore at him, and transgressed all the limits of 
decency. The passenger made no reply ; he was 
a foreigner ; there was no one to take his side, 
and, besides, the aggressor had been allowed on 
board as a favour, and at his own special request. 
'I 'he quarrelsome fellow was standing on the 
deck. Well, hardly three minutes after the 
altercation, a kaba’da jumped out of the sea, 
struck the fellow with its head, and jumped back 
again on the other side. The man was picked 
up dead, and his corpse thrown into the sea. 


XIX Many are the curious stories I 

have heard tell about tortoises, and such as the 
mind can scarce credit. I have it from Abou- 
Mohammed el-Hassan, son of Amr, that he 
heard an old sailor relate, how a ship, setting 
out from India, happened on some mischance 
and put into a little island, which was entirely 
bare of wood or water, but where their situa- 
tion obliged them to anchor and disembark 
their cargo, while they set the vessel to rights. 
That done, the bales were re-embarked, and 

3 1 * 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


they made ready for departure. But, in the 
midst of all this, there fell the Feast of the New 
Year, and the ship’s company celebrated it by 
carrying ashore what they could scrape together 
of small pieces of wood, palm leaves, and rags, 
and making a bonfire. Suddenly the whole 
island shook, quivered under their feet, and, 
since they stood not far from the water, in they 
cast themselves and dung onto the sides of the 
ship. At that very moment, the island dived 
down into the waves, with such a swirl that it 
was a wonder they were not everyone drowned. 
They barely escaped with their lives, a prey to 
the keenest terror. 

Now, the little island was no more nor less 
than a tortoise, lying asleep on the surface of 
the water ; woken by the singeing of their 
bonfire, it had taken to flight. 

Flow had that come to pass ? 1 asked my 
narrator. “ Each year ”, he told me, “ the 
tortoise rises to the surface of the water for a 
certain sum of days, to rest itself after its long 
sojourn in the caverns of the sea, among the 
clefts and crannies of the ocean bottom, where 
flourish monstrous trees and fearful herbage, 
far, far stranger than any plant or tree our 
earth can show. It rises to the surface and lies 
wallowing there days together, quite stupid, 
like a man in drink. But, as soon as it comes to 
itself, back it plunges. And when the male 
couples with the female, their nuptials always 
take place on the surface of the ocean ”. 



THE MARVELS' Of INDIA 


XX An old sailor told Abou’l- 

Hassan, son of Amr, who, in his turn, told me 
the story, that sailing in the gobbs (of Screndib) 
he had been the guest of a monarch of those 
regions. “ They put food before us ”, he said, 
“ and we ate. Now among this repast, there 
happened to be a sauce, in which floated bits of 
cooked meat, heads, hands, and feet, just as it 
might have been the heads, feet, and hands of 
young boys. That turned my gorge and I 
ate no more, though, till that moment, my 
appetite was keen. The king took notice of it, 
but said nothing. Next day, when 1 went to 
pay him my respects, he gave the order to his 
people to bring in a fish ; and, but for its 
scales and the fish-like squirmings it made, I 
had thought it a son of Adam. ‘ There ! ’ said 
the king, ‘ this is what your stomach turned 
against, the best of our fish, the best flavoured, 
the easiest to digest, and the least noxious ’. 
And thenceforth 1 found no difficulty in 
eating it ”. 


XXI Someone, who had travelled in 

Zeila and the land of the Abyssinians, told me 
that in the Sea of I labash there lives a fish 
which in every way resembles a son of Adam, 
his body, feet, and hands. The fishermen who 

u 33* 



Tim MARVELS OF INDIA 

go far afield, poor wretches whose lot it is to get 
their living in unexplored regions, on the wild 
seashores, amidst the islands and the mountains, 
where never human soul comes their way, 
sometimes light upon this human-visaged fish, 
and couple with the females. Thence are born 
creatures, like unto men but amphibious. 
Perhaps these human-looking fishes were 
originally derived from the union of man and 
some kind of fish, a union which would have 
produced these creatures resembling men, and 
thereafter such couplings have been repeated 
during the course of the centuries. Thus it is 
that man, allying himself with the panther, the 
hyena, and other beasts of the earth, has 
begotten the monkey, the nesna, and other 
creatures which resemble him. And thus it is 
that the mingling of pigs and buffaloes has 
produced the elephant, of dogs and goats the 
wild boar, of the ass and the mare the mule. 
If it were our purpose to enumerate all the 
different products of this sort of cross-breeding, 
our material might well prove startling but 
would lead us away from our proper subject, 
which is the Marvels of India. 

The fish, called %haloiw/> has, so they say, a 
human face and sexual organs which are like 
ours, both the male and the female. It is 
caught, and its hide, thicker than the hide of 
the elephant, is tanned and used for shoe- 
leather. 

It is affirmed that every bird which flies in the 

34 



THE MARVELS' OF INDIA 


air, over the face of the ground, has its equiva- 
lent among the fishes. I, for my part, have seen 
in the Gulf of Ayla, in Syria, a little fish, 
coloured like a green woodpecker, which 
keeps flitting all the time in and out of the 
water. 


XXII Among other curiosities of the 

Sea of Pars, sometimes at night, when the 
waves are running high and dashing together, 
the water is seen to sparkle, and the sailor 
would swear that he was voyaging over a sea 
of fire. 


XXIII There are also in the ocean, so 

they say, monstrous snakes, terrible creatures 
called tannin. In mid-winter, when the clouds 
hang low on the surface of the water, this 
tannin leaves the sea and enters into a cloud, 
still warm from the warmth of the element it 
has deserted ; for the sea-water is warm at that 
season of the year. The chill grips it, and there 
it stays in the cloud, imprisoned. And, the 
winds blowing over the surface of the water, 
the cloud rises and carries off the tannin with it ; 
and so it voyages from one point of the horizon 

35 * 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


to another. And when the vapour of the cloud 
is dissipated and flies away in rags, scattered by 
the wind, no longer supported, down falls the 
tannin again, sometimes on land, sometimes in 
the sea. As often as God wishes to plague a 
nation, he lets fall a tannin in their territory, and 
the monster eats up their camels, their horses, 
their kine, their sheep, till it can find no more 
to devour and so dies ; or till God rids them 
of it. 

Sailors, travellers, merchants, and ships’- 
captains have told me how, more than once, 
they have watched it sweep overhead, all black, 
trailing its length in the clouds. Now and 
again, its tail was dangling in the air ; but if 
it felt the cold, it disappeared, coiling itself 
away in the cloud. Blessed be God, the best of 
Creators ! 


XXI I Abou’zabra el-Barkhati has 

furnished me with certain particulars, con- 
cerning the serpents of India. An Indian 
physician, who dwelt in Scrcndib, told him 
that there arc in India some three thousand one 
hundred and twenty kinds of snakes, and that 
the worst kind are in the land of Taka. When 
the wind blows from this quarter, it kills every- 
thing it touches, birds, quadrupeds, reptiles, 
for a distance of three parasangs on every side. 

36 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


And this district is only inhabited a part of the 
year. People live here, that is to say, while the 
wind blows from the sea. But, as soon as ever 
the wind begins to blow from the land, from 
the province of the serpents, the inhabitants 
rouse one another and, fleeing away to their 
ships, take refuge among the islands of the sea. 
When the wind has dropped, back they come 
all together, and, disembarking, till the soil and 
sow their harvest ; or else they work the mines, 
for the land of Taka is rich in mines of gold 
and silver. . . . 


XXV A ship’s-captain relates how, 

driven into a bay by adverse winds, he and his 
men went ashore and walked into a marshy 
thicket, where lay the tumbled trunks of 
ancient trees, heaped one upon another. Me 
wandered about, this way and that, looking for 
the timber to make his ship a mast. Finally he 
chose a splendid trunk, perfectly smooth and 
straight, and of noble girth besides. Other 
trees were thrown across it, in the utmost 
confusion, just as if its fall dated from many 
years back. They measured it, and found it 
longer than they needed. Thereupon they took 
a saw, and prepared to cut it down to the length 
their business then demanded, a matter of fifty 
cubits. But, hardly had the saw begun its work 

35 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


and was cutting into the trunk, when the trunk 
stirred and made as if to crawl away. It was a 
serpent. The sailors, for their part, were not 
slow in regaining the beach, flinging them- 
selves into the water, and climbing on board 
ship. And this they did without further acci- 
dent. 


XXVI Mohammed, son of Balishad, 

tells me that once, while he made the crossing 
from India to China and was travelling on one 
of the neighbouring seas, the hour of the first 
prayer being come, he went down into the 
closet to perform his ablutions, and, happening 
to cast his eyes upon the sea, up he got again in 
a panic and ran on deck, without any further 
thought for what he had come to do. “ Down 
with the sails, men ! ” he commanded. And 
they did as he bade them. “ Throw the cargo 
into the sea”, was his next command. He went 
down close to the water’s surface, and, in the 
voice of a man struck by terror, “ You 
merchants ”, he asked, “ which do you love 
best, the goods you have a thousand ways of 
replacing, or your lives, which, once gone, 
you never can restore ? ” “ Good Lord ”, 

exclaimed the merchants, “ what’s the matter 
that you should harangue us thus ? The wind 
is soft ; the sea is smooth ; and here we are, 

38 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 

sailing along peacefully, under the protection 
of the Lord of the Worlds.” “ Merchants ”, he 
answered them, “ be you my witnesses one 
against another, and may the crew witness for 
me against you all : I have counselled you 
before the hour of doom, and you have rejected 
my counsel. Now, for my part, I leave you to 
the mercy of God ”. 

At the same time, he ordered the coxswain of 
the long-boat to bring it round. And, climbing 
down, he had a store of water and food carried 
down with him, and put off. The merchants, 
seeing him go, shouted to him : “ Come back, 
and we will do your bidding ”. “ I swear by 
God ”, he replied “ that I will do no such 
thing till, with your own hands and of your 
own free will, you have thrown overboard all 
that you possess ”. 

The merchants made no further ado ; every- 
thing was thrown into the sea, whether it was 
worthless or of great price. And presently 
there was nothing left on board, but men, 
water, and victuals. The captain returned, 
climbed on board again, and “ Ah 1 If only 
you knew what is waiting for us to-night ”, 
he said. “ Believe me ; purify your souls and 
pray ; repent of your past sins and implore the 
forgiveness of God ”. bach did as he bade 
them. And, when night had come, sure 
enough, God opened the gates of the sky and 
loosed a wind, which filled the space between 
heaven and earth and dashed the waves against 

59 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


the clouds and let them tumble back against 
the shore. Many were the ships which the 
storm carried off, both upon the high seas and 
along the sea-coast ; few were the mariners 
who escaped. 

But, as for this ship which, by a God-sent 
inspiration, had been lightened, with the 
sacrifice of its whole cargo, tossed on a boiling 
sea, it rode the waves and remained seaworthy. 
The passengers recited verses of the Koran , 
prayed and called on God. Three days and 
three nights, they could neither eat nor drink. 

On the fourth day, God gave a sign to winds 
and waves ; the wind dropped and the sea 
grew calm. He quieted the storm, as, we know, 
His is the power. And the sailors launched the 
long-boat and rowed it to the front, towing 
the ship a day and a night. Thus they reached 
an island, where the sea had gathered together 
the wreckage of ships, rigging, and bales 
which the storm had swept up from many 
different countries. Here they anchored, and 
even found again what they had themselves 
lost. This they recovered and stowed away. 
They also chose and possessed themselves of 
everything they liked, among such merchandise 
as was still unspoiled by the water. They 
buried the corpses of the drowned. And, 
presently, the wind blew fair, and, after water- 
ing, they set sail for their native land, arriving 
safe and sound, without further mishap. The 
merchandise they had recovered increased their 


40 



THE MARJ 'ELS OF INDIA 


capital tenfold, and this voyage procured them 
wealth and happiness. Glory unto God, the 
Master of the Worlds ! 


XXVII An old sailor once told me that 

the inhabitants of a considerable township in 
Dhaif were compelled to emigrate, because of 
a serpent in their neighbourhood, which ate up 
their cattle, their horses, and them themselves. 
So the place was abandoned, and, since that 
time, has been deserted. 


XXI XII According to the story told me 

by Abou-Mohammcd, son of El-Hassan, son of 
Amr, a ship’s-captain, driven before a violent 
gust of wind, was lucky enough to catch sight 
of an inlet, where he took shelter. There he 
spent a day and a night. And, during the 
morning of the next day, on the shore of the 
inlet, opposite them, what should they see but 
an enormous serpent, a fearful creature, of 
bigness beyond all words, which came down 
into the water, crossed the inlet, climbed up 
again on the other side and disappeared with 
the rapidity of a lightning-flash. Then, a little 
before dark, the monster returned, and crossed 


41 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 

the inlet a second time, but this time slowly. 
Kept there by bad weather, the travellers 
witnessed that same spectacle five days running ; 
the beast set out in the morning and returned 
during the afternoon. On the sixth day, the 
captain said to his people : “ Do you land and 
discover where this serpent goes ”. So a 
number of the crew disembarked and, as soon 
as ever the serpent came back, walked inland 
about a mile. Thus they reached a marshy, 
damp thicket ; and, lo, the thicket was en- 
cumbered by the tusks of elephants, big and 
little. They ran off and told the news to the 
captain, and, taking a party of his men, he 
hurried to the spot they indicated and carried 
back a load of ivory. For many days together 
the ship’s company was busy, transporting the 
ivory from the marsh to the ship, making the 
most of the interval between the serpent’s 
return and its setting out next day. Their profit 
passed all believing, and they cleared room for 
it in the ship by throwing overboard objects 
of lesser value and which they were less sure 
of selling. Twenty days longer they stayed in 
the inlet. This serpent, so it appears, used to 
prey on elephants and left the tusks there. 

One day, I questioned Captain Ismailouia 
about the foregoing story. It was in the year 
339. “ I have heard of it myself ”, he said. “ It 
is perfectly true ”. There are also serpents in 
the sea of various kinds, but in the water they 
do very little harm. The most formidable kind 

42 



THE MARVELS OE INDIA 


are those which live in the mountains, in 
ravines, in desert places, where there is no 
water. In the Oman Mountains there are 
serpents which kill instantly. In the district, 
situate between Sahari, the port of Oman, and 
the mountains of Nahmed, there is a place 
where no man ventures ; it is called Serpent 
Valley. And there arc serpents, so they say, a 
span long or even shorter, which double them- 
selves up into a hoop, head to tail, and fly 
straight at a horseman ; their bite is instant 
death ; their breath blinds and is also killing. 
When a traveller adventures thither, they fly 
at him in crowds and do not miss, all along the 
road. And that is why no man crosses this 
region. 


XXIX An old stager, who had travelled 

through Marekin, a city which lies one parasang 
from the sea-coast of the land of Adcmiyoun, 
once told me that the mountains there are 
infested by serpents, grey or speckled in 
colour. Now if one of these serpents sees a 
man before the man sees it, that serpent dies ; 
and, similarly, if the man sees the serpent before 
he is seen, then it is the man who dies ; and, if 
they both catch sight of one another at the 
same time, then both of them die. That is the 
worst kind of serpent. 


43 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


XXX According to the story, told me 

by Mohammed, son of Balishad, in the confines 
of Waqwaq there arc scorpions which fly about 
like sparrows ; when they sting a man, his 
body swells up, lie falls ill, his skin peels off in 
ribbons, and he dies. 


XXXI Ismailoui'a tells me, and several 

mariners have confirmed his story, that, during 
the year 310, he set sail in his ship from Oman 
to go to Kabila. A storm drove him towards 
Sofala of the Zindjs. “ Seeing the coast we had 
reached ”, said the captain, “ and realising that 
we had fallen among man-eating negroes, we 
had no doubt what our fate would be ; we 
performed our ablutions and turned our hearts 
to God, one to another reciting the prayer for 
the dead. The negroes surrounded us in their 
canoes and took us into harbour. There we 
cast anchor and went ashore. They led us 
before their king. He was a handsome, well- 
set-up young negro. He asked us who we 
were, and whither we were going. We replied 
that his territory had been our goal. 

‘ You lie ’, he said. ‘ It was by no means here 
you meant to land The winds, and they alone, 
have driven you ashore, willy-nilly And 

44 



TUB AIARVBLS OB INDIA 


when we had admitted that he spoke the truth, 
‘ Bring ashore your merchandise he said, 
‘ and buy and sell. You have nothing to fear 

So ashore we brought our bales, and started 
to do business ; and excellent business for us 
it was, with no restriction and no duties to pay. 
We made the king presents, and he replied with 
others, of an equal or of an even greater value. 
There we stayed several months. But, at last, 
the moment of parting came. We asked leave 
to go, and it was straightway granted. We 
put on board the goods we had bought, and 
concluded our transactions. And, as soon as all 
was settled, the king, hearing of our intention 
to set sail, bore us company down to the shore 
with some of his people, and, getting into the 
boats, they sped us as far as the ship. The king 
even came on board with seven of his atten- 
dants. 

But, when I saw them there, 1 said to myseli : 
‘ That young king would fetch at least thirty 
dinars , if he were auctioned in the market- 
place at Oman, and his seven attendants a 
hundred and sixty dinars the lot. Their clothes 
are worth twenty dinars at the lowest. Alto- 
gether, we should make a profit of not less 
than three thousand dirhems , without stirring 
a finger Thus reflecting, I gave the crew 
certain orders ; sails were spread, and the 
anchor was hauled up. Meanwhile the king 
was behaving in the friendliest possible 
manner, exhorting us to return presently, and 

4? 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


promising us a friendly reception. But, when 
he saw the sails swelling in the wind and the 
vessel already under way, his face changed. 
‘You arc going’, he said. ‘Well, I will say 
good-bye ’. And be made to climb down into 
his canoes, which were moored alongside. We 
cut their painters, and remarked : ‘ You stay 
where you arc, with us ; we are taking you 
home ; and there we’ll make it up to you for 
all your kindness ’. 

‘ Strangers ’, he said, ‘ when you happened on 
our shores, my people wanted to cat you and 
spoil your goods, as, in their time, they have 
done to others. It was 1 who protected you. 
I asked nothing of you. As a token of my good- 
will, I came on board your ship to see you off. 
Then treat me as justice demands, and let me 
go back to my native land ’. 

But we paid no attention to what he said ; 
little we cared. The wind freshened. Quickly 
the coast-line disappeared. Then night wrapped 
us in her veils, and we reached the high seas. 

Day returned, and the king and his attendants 
were added to the other slaves, whose number 
was round about two hundred heads. He 
received no better treatment than the rest, his 
companions in captivity. He said no word, and 
never opened his mouth. He comported him- 
self just as if we were strangers to him, and we 
knew not who he was. Once arrived at Oman, 
the slaves were sold and the king with them. 

Well, some years later, sailing from Oman 

46 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 

towards Kabila, the wind drove us a second 
time against the sea-coast of Sofala of the 
Zindjs, and we put in at exactly the same place. 
The negroes saw us, and surrounded us in their 
canoes, and we recognised one the other. Now 
we were quite sure of perishing and terror 
sealed our lips. Silently we performed our 
ablutions, and recited the prayers for the dead. 
We said good-bye, every man to his fellow. 
The negroes took and led us to the king’s 
house. They made us enter. What was our 
surprise : there was the same king, him whom 
we had known, seated on his throne, as if we 
had left him there not long ago. Down we 
flung ourselves in his presence, and, sprawling, 
had not the strength to rise. 

‘ Aha ! ’ he exclaimed. ‘ My old friends ! ’ 
None of us could find tongue to answer. We 
shook in every limb, ‘ Come now ! ’ he con- 
tinued. ‘ Lift up your heads ; I grant you the 
aman, you and your goods Some of us raised 
our heads ; but others could not, crushed by 
shame. And, for his part, he dealt with us 
kindly and graciously till we had all raised our 
heads. But, even then, we could not pluck up 
courage to look him in the face, so strongly did 
remorse and fear affect us. And, when, at 
length, we had come to our senses, reassured 
by his am an , ‘ Ah, traitors ! ’ he cried, ‘ how 
did you treat me, after what I had done for 
you ! ’ ‘ Mercy, King, have mercy ! ’ we 

severally implored. ‘ I will be merciful ’, he 

4 > 



Til Li MARVELS' OF INDIA 


said ; ‘ fall to your business of buying and 
selling as you did before ; you have full 
liberty to traffic We could not believe our 
ears, and feared it might be a ruse to persuade 
us to unship our merchandise. Nevertheless, 
unship it we did, offering the king a present of 
incomparable value. He refused it, remarking : 
‘ You are not worthy I should accept a present 
from you. I will not soil my fortune with any- 
thing coming from your hands ’. 

Thereupon we went quietly about our business. 
The time of parting came, and we asked his 
permission to embark. It was given. When we 
were actually ready to go, I went to inform 
him of it. ‘ Go your way ’, he said, ‘ under the 
protection of God ! ’ ‘ O King ’, I answered, 
‘ you loaded us with kindness and we requited 
you like graceless traitors. But how was it you 
escaped and managed to return home ? ’ 

‘ After you had sold me at Oman ’, he replied, 
‘ my buyer took me to a city, called Basra ’ (and 
here he described Basra), ‘ where I learned the 
usage of prayer and fasting and some parts of 
the Koran. My master sold me to another, who 
took me into the territory of the king of the 
Arabs, to a place called Bagdad ’ (and he 
described Bagdad). ‘ In that city, I learned to 
speak correctly, and completed my education 
in the Koran , praying with the people in 
mosques. I saw the Caliph, whose name is 
El-Moqtadir. A year and longer I stayed in 
Bagdad, when there came a troop of men of 

‘'48 



THE MARVELS OE INDIA 


Khorassan, riding camel-back. Seeing a great 
crowd of them, whither were they all going, I 
asked. To Mecca, they answered me. What was 
Mecca, I demanded. It was in Mecca, they 
replied, was the holy House of God, where 
Musulmans make pilgrimage. And they in- 
structed me, concerning the history of the 
Temple. I should do well to follow the 
caravan, I thought within myself. But my 
master, to whom 1 communicated the circum- 
stance, was neither willing to go himself nor to 
let me go of my own accord. So 1 found a 
means of eluding his vigilance, and mingling 
with the crowd of pilgrims on the road, 1 
constituted myself their servant ; 1 was fed 
and provided with the two garments, neces- 
sary for the ihram. In fact, under their guidance, 
1 accomplished all the ceremonial observances 
of the pilgrimage. 

Fearing to return to Bagdad, lest my master 
should kill me, I joined another caravan, going 
to Cairo. I offered my services to travellers, 
who, in return, gave me rides upon their 
camels and shared with me their food. Arrived 
at Cairo, I saw the great river, called the Nile. 
“ Whence docs it flow ? ” I enquired. “ Its 
source ”, they replied, “ is in the land of the 
Zindjs ”. “ Whereabouts P ” “ Near a great 
city, called Assouan, on the frontier of the 
territory of the Blacks ”. 

Hearing this, I followed the banks of the Nile, 
going from one town to another, and begging 
e 49 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 

alms, which were not refused me. But I fell in 
with a troop of blacks, who used me ill. They 
bound me, and laid burdens on me, heavier 
than 1 could bear, among the other servants. 
I escaped, only to fall in with a second troop, 
who took and sold me. A second time I 
escaped, and thus travelled on, till, after many 
adventures of the same kind, at last I found 
myself in a country, which borders the country 
of the Zindjs. There 1 disguised myself ; none 
of the terrors I had experienced, since leaving 
Cairo, equalled my terror, in approaching my 
own kingdom. For, said I, a new king has no 
doubt taken my place on the throne and with 
the army. To get back one’s power is no easy 
thing. If I declare myself or am discovered, 
they will take and lead me before the new king, 
and I shall be slain out of hand. Or, it may be, 
a partisan of his will lop off my head, to curry 
favour. 

So, a prey to the keenest terror, 1 travelled 
at night and hid by day. Reaching the sea- 
coast, I took ship, and, touching at various 
points, was finally landed one night upon the 
shore of my native land. I questioned an old 
woman. “ The king who rules here, is he a 
just king ? ” I asked. “ My son ”, she answered, 
“ we have no king but God ”. And the good 
woman told me how the king had been carried 
off. 1 pretended the keenest astonishment, just 
as if the story did not concern myself and 
events of which 1 was so well aware. “ The 


50 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


inhabitants of this kingdom ”, she added, 
“ have agreed not to take another, till they 
have some definite news of the first. Sooth- 
sayers have told them that he is living safe and 
sound in the country of the Arabs 
When day dawned, I entered the city and 
made my way to my palace. There I found my 
family, as I had left them, but plunged in the 
greatest affliction. My people listened to my 
story with surprise and joy. Like me, they 
adopted the religion of Islam. Thus, a month 
before your coming, I took up my kingdom 
once more. I am glad and satisfied with the 
grace which God has accorded me and mine, 
instructing us in the precepts of Islam, the true 
faith, in the usage of prayer, fasting and 
pilgrimage, and in the knowledge of what is 
forbidden and what is allowed ; none other in 
the land of Zindjs has received such favour. 
And if I pardoned you, it was because you were 
the first cause of the purity of my faith. But 
there is still something on my conscience, of 
which I pray that God will wash away the 
sin ’. ‘ What is that, O King ? ’ I asked him. 

* It is that I left my master, in Bagdad, without 
his leave, and that I never returned to his 
service. Could I but find an honest man, I 
would beg him to take my master the sum 
necessary to buy me off. If there was among 
you an upright man, if you were persons of 
respectability, I would give you the money to 
hand over to him, a sum ten times the sum he 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


paid, as recompense for the delay. But you 
are no better than traitors and thieves 
We bade him good-bye. ‘ Go ’, he said ; 
‘ and, if you come back, you shall have no 
different treatment ; you shall have the best 
possible reception. Musulmans shall know 
that they may come to us like brothers, since we 
are Musulmans too. But as for speeding you to 
your ship, I have my reasons for staying where 
1 am \ And so we parted ”. 


XXXI 1 As for soothsayers, they say 

that, in the land of the Zindjs, there arc those 
who are extremely skilled in the art of divina- 
tion. Ismailouia tells me that a ship’s-captain 
once told him the following story : “ I was 
with the Zindjs in the year 332, and a soothsayer 
of the country asked me : ‘ How many ships 
arc in your company ? ’ ‘ Sixteen ’, I replied. 
‘ Very well ’, he said. ‘ Fifteen of them will 
return to Oman safe and sound. The sixteenth 
will be wrecked and only three of its crew 
will be saved. After much hardship, they will 
regain their native land ’. 

Our sixteen vessels put to sea on the same day. 
Mine was in the rear, and I made the best speed 
I could to catch them up. But, on the third day, 
there appeared before us a massy shape, like a 
sort of black island . In my hurry, I neglected 

5 * 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


to let out the sails as I should have done, for 
navigation in that sea is a troublesome business, 
and unawares we were carried towards this 
mass, which ran against us violently. It was a 
sea monster. With a single stroke of its tail, it 
demolished the ship. I and two others escaped 
the catastrophe in a little boat. The sea threw 
us ashore on one of the Dibadjat islands, where 
we were stranded a year. We did not leave the 
island and return to Oman till wc had under- 
gone many sufferings. As for the other ships, 
by the grace of the Most-High, they all got 
back to port safe and sound ”. 


XXXIII Id-IIassan, son of Amr, and 
other persons who have travelled in India, 
have furnished me with a remarkable fund 
of information, regarding the birds of that 
country, of Zabedj, of Qomar, of Senf, and of 
other regions which border on India. “ The 
biggest feather I have seen ”, said Abou’l- 
Abbas, of Siraf, “ had a quill about two ells 
long and capable of holding, so it appeared, a 
skinful of water “ I saw in India ”, Captain 
Ismailoui'a told me, “ a quill which belonged 
to one of the principal merchants and stood 
near his house. In it they poured water, as into 
a great jar ”. And, when I manifested some 
surprise, “ You need not be astonished ”, he 

53 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


added ; — “ why, a sailor of the land of the 
Zindjs told me that, in the palace of the king 
of Sira, he saw a quill which held twenty-five 
skins of water 


XXXIV Abou’l - Hassan Ali, son of 
Shadan, of Siraf, informed me that a citizen of 
Shiraz told him that a village, near this city, 
had been deserted because of a bird. “ When I 
asked him ”, said Abou’l-Hassan, “ how a 
bird could drive the population away, he 
replied : 

‘ As far as I have been able to learn, an 
enormous bird lighted on the roof-top of a 
house in the village, broke the roof and fell 
down inside. The people there ran out, utter- 
ing yells of terror. Then the villagers as- 
sembled and, going in, found the bird entirely 
filling up the house. Since they had no other 
method of securing it, they killed the creature 
by dint of blows. It was naturally clumsy and 
could not take to flight. They drew its blood, 
carved its flesh, and divided the joints among 
the population. There was about seventy rotls 
weight for each man, not counting a portion 
of one hundred rotls, reserved for the vakil 
(headman) of the village, who was away, with 
three others, on the service of the Sahib of the 
town. It was upon the house of this same vakil 

54 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 

that the bird had fallen. The villagers had the 
bird’s flesh cooked during the day and ate it, 
together with their families and children. Next 
morning, they were all very ill. The Iraki l 
came back, heard what had happened, and he 
and his companions refused to touch the meat. 
As for those who had eaten of it, one after 
another they died, within three or four days. 
None of them were spared. So the village was 
empty ; the ivakil took himself off ; and 
nobody has returned there since. It seemed to 
us probable that this bird was an Indian bird, 
and had eaten some venemous beast, whence 
the poison had infected its blood. Much 
weakened it had flown through the air, till its 
strength had failed it, and then fallen down on 
the roof ’ ”. 


XXXV Many is the ship’s-mastcr, who 

has told me that he has heard tell, how, at 
Sofala of the Zindjs, are birds which seize an 
animal in their beak or claws, carry it up into 
the sky and let it drop again, to kill or break it ; 
then they swoop down and devour it. In this 
same country of the Zindjs, there is, so they 
say, a bird which falls on huge tortoises, seizes 
them, carries them up into the air, and drops 
them against some rock, where they are 
broken. And, it is affirmed, that they eat as 



THE MARVELS OE INDIA 

many as five or six in a day, if they can come 
by them. What is more, this bird flies away in 
terror, if it sees a man, so hideous are the men 
of that country. 


XXXVI In the highlands of the Zindjs’ 
country are rich-yielding gold mines. There, 
I am informed by Captain Ismailouia, men 
search for gold by digging into the soil. And 
this work sometimes brings them to ground, 
excavated as if it were an ant-hill, whence, 
straightway, issue a horde of ants, big as cats, 
which devour and tear them in pieces. In the 
year 307, the Emir of Oman, Ahmed, son of 
Helal, carried among presents, which he was 
taking to the Caliph Moqtadir, a black ant, as 
big as a cat, shut up in an iron cage, and 
secured by a chain. The creature died on 
the road, in the neighbourhood of Dhou- 
Djabala. It was embalmed, however, and 
brought, in a good state of preservation, to 
Bagdad, that it might be viewed by the Caliph 
and the populace. Those who had had the 
carrying of it said that it was fed every day, 
morning and evening, with two mannas of 
flesh, cut up small. 


56 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


XXXVII Mohammed, son of Balishad, 
has told me that, according to reports, furnished 
him by persons who had touched on the 
country of Waqwaq, there is to be found a 
large tree with round leaves, and stalks which 
bear fruit, similar to the pumpkin, but larger 
and offering some resemblance to the human 
face. As often as the wind shakes it, thence 
proceeds a voice. Inside it is full of air. And, if 
you pluck it, straightway out rushes the air 
and it shrinks to no more than an empty 
bladder. A sailor noticed this fruit ; it took his 
fancy, and he cut one, meaning to carry it away. 
But it immediately shrank, and what was left in 
the fellow’s hands was of as much worth as a 
dead crow. 


XXXVIII I asked Mohammed, son of 
Balishad, about monkeys, and what accounts 
of them he had heard. Many were the stories 
he told me, and, among others, he related how, 
in the neighbourhood of Sanfin, in the Lameri 
and Qaqala valleys, there dwell monkeys, which 
grow unusually tall and are divided in com- 
panies, each with its captain, the biggest of the 
troop. Now and again, they leave the woods 
and, infesting the roads and places where men 
pass, they stop travellers and will not let them 

57 



THE MARVELS OE INDIA 


go, until they have surrendered to them some 
part of their livestock, cither a sheep, a cow, or 
other provision. 

“ And many are they who have told me ”, 
continued Mohammed, son of Balishad, “ that 
a troup of monkeys have stopped the caravan, 
with which they were travelling, and torn their 
water-skins in pieces, while they were still far 
away from any watering-place. Finally, the 
travellers have made them some present, and, 
thereupon, the monkeys have allowed them to 
pass. But, for lack of water, most of the 
travellers have died. Only a handful have been 
able to reach the nearest watering-place.” 


XXXIX The same informant has told 
me of the adventures of a sailor, who, in the 
year 390, embarked upon a ship which 
belonged to him and made the voyage to 
Qaqala. This expedition turned out well ; 
they reached their destination, unshipped their 
cargo, and made to carry a part of it into a 
district, which lay about seven days’ march 
from the coast. Meanwhile, they hauled up the 
ship, high and dry, in a little bay, where the sea 
could not harm it, and surrounded it with 
pieces of wood to shore it up. 

“ This done ”, said the sailor, “ there they 
left me as watchman, with a sufficient stock of 

t 

58 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 

provisions, and themselves set off for the town, 
where they stayed, busy about their buying 
and selling. When they had gone, 1 saw a troop 
of monkeys who came roaming round the ship 
and trying to climb on board. I drove them 
away with stones. A big she-monkey, how- 
ever, had gained the ship. 1 sent her about her 
business, and thought her gone. But she 
eluded my vigilance and, climbing up upon the 
other side, she drew near me, just as I was 
eating my meal. So I tossed her a bit of bread 
and she ate it. Some time she stayed with me, 
then climbed down again and disappeared. 
That evening, back I saw her come, carrying in 
her mouth a cluster of twenty bananas. She 
gave a cry and I helped her up ; whereat, she 
set the bananas before me, ate, and, thereafter, 
did not go away. During the following days, 
she set off in like fashion, and returned, bringing 
bananas and other fruit she had picked in the 
woods. Site spent the nights in the ship, by my 
side. She aroused my desires, and 1 satisfied 
my passion in her embrace. But three months 
had gone by, when 1 saw her grow heavy ; her 
gait became dragging. Great was my dismay ; 
she would be the shame of me, I reflected, 
when my companions came back and under- 
stood what had happened. The alarm I ex- 
perienced inclined me to flight, and, taking 
the ship’s dinghy, I furnished it with mast, sails, 
and an anchor, stocked it with skins of water, 
provisions, my clothes and all my belongings, 

59 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 

and then, taking advantage of the hour when 
my she-monkey was absent, I got on board and 
launched forth, come what might, leaving the 
ship unguarded. An arduous voyage of twenty 
tfamas, which was nearly my death, brought me 
to the coast of one of the Armanan islands. 
There I stayed some time, to refresh myself, 
rest, and replenish my store of sweet water, 
bananas, and other fruit. Not a soul did I see, 
excepting fishermen who came down from 
among the trees. Once more I embarked, and 
sailed for about seventy days without any 
bourne or notion where I was going. And 
presently I chanced upon an island, called 
Bedfarkalah. A little later, I came to Kalah ; 
and, some time after that, 1 happened to meet 
the master of my ship and several of the 
persons who had embarked on it. They told 
me, that, being returned to the bay, they had 
found there, in the ship, a she-monkey, which 
had given birth to a monkey or two, human- 
visaged, the chest bare of fur, with ears shorter 
than have the generality of the monkey-tribe. 
They had not hesitated to assume that the 
sailor must be the sire of these little monkeys, 
and that he had escaped in the dinghy ; for 
there was nothing else missing from the ship, 
save only the dinghy and its gear. Others, 
however, were inclined to think that the she- 
monkey had made away with the sailor, and 
that the dinghy had been stolen by some 
passer-by or fisherman. The matter remained 

6o 



THE MAR EELS OF INDIA 


obscure. And, in conclusion, they had got rid 
of the mother and her brats.” 

The sailor who told me the foregoing story, 
added Mohammed, son of Balishad, had very 
bad sight. He attributed this infirmity to his 
relations with the monkey ; it had been 
aggravated further by a long life upon the sea. 


XE A sailor has told me, how a 

ship, as it made the crossing from Oman to 
Senf, was lost at sea. Ten men only escaped in 
the long-boat, and the wind carried them onto 
the shores of an island, which was quite 
unknown. Thrown up upon the coast, there 
they stayed for the rest of the day, stupefied by 
the fears they had experienced and the suffer- 
ings they had undergone. At last, they took 
courage and, beaching the long-boat, spent the 
night in it. Next morning, they walked into 
the interior of the island, where they found an 
abundance of sweet water, the soil moist and 
well-shaded, and thick-growing trees which 
were laden with fruit, bananas in plenty, and 
sugar-canes. No trace of man could they find. 
And, after they had freely eaten of these fruits 
and drunk of this water, back they went to the 
long-boat, dragged it out of reach of the waves, 
and shored it up with pieces of wood. Then 
they wove it a protection against the sun with 

61 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 

leaves of the banana and other trees, and made 
themselves an arbour at its side. 

Now, five or six days later, what should they 
see coming but a troop of monkeys, advancing 
on them, headed by a monkey, bigger and 
taller than the rest. Opposite the long-boat, 
they paused. Struck by panic, the sailors 
climbed inside. No word did the monkeys say. 
The monkey-chief took up his stand, and 
deployed his forces to right and to left, like the 
general of an army. Presently, they returned, 
making him signs, as though they were 
imparting some piece of information ; and, 
when evening came, they went away again. 

The castaways were in a terrible state of 
perturbation, fearing that the monkeys would 
kill them. All night long, they turned over 
their chances of safety ; they had no provisions ; 
they knew not what path to follow ; they were 
in a bad way indeed ; and they saw no means 
of extricating themselves. 

But in the morning a monkey came roaming 
round their camp, went away and came back 
with a companion. That last made gestures, as 
though showing them something. “ 1 followed 
the monkeys ”, said the informant of the 
sailor, who told me the story, “ till I saw them 
enter a thicket. There I stopped. I dared go 
no further, and went back again to my fellows. 
Next day, the whole troop returned, just as it 
had done the first time. Down sat the monkey- 
chief, not far from the long-boat, and deployed 

’62 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 

his comrades in the same fashion. And, soon 
afterwards, here came two monkeys, each 
carrying a nugget of the purest gold, which he 
flung on the ground before us. It was gold of 
an extreme purity, forming, as it were, thick 
roots. The delight it caused us did much to 
obliterate from our minds the painfulness of 
our condition. 

In the morning, again a monkey came wander- 
ing round the long-boat. And, when it made 
to go, I followed it through the depths of the 
wood, and, emerging from the thicket, found 
myself in a plain, with black sand under foot. 
In front of me, the monkey started digging. 
I stopped, and started digging too. And what 
should 1 come upon, but roots of gold, inter- 
woven like the meshes of a net. I tore them up, 
till my hands bled. Then 1 gathered together 
my spoil and carried it off, going back the way 
I had come. But the thickness of the wood led 
me astray. I climbed into a tree and spent the 
night there. Next morning, I saw the monkeys ; 
as soon as they had gone past, 1 followed them, 
till I had caught sight of the sea in the distance. 
Thereupon, I waited, hidden among the 
branches of a tree, and, that night, when the 
monkeys had returned, I climbed down again 
and managed to rejoin my companions. They 
received me with tears of joy. ‘ We were sure 
you had perished they exclaimed. I told 
them of my expedition and tumbled the gold 
beneath their eyes. 


63 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 

This was but another source of misery and 
regret, — to think that, at the moment when we 
had attained to riches, we should have no 
means of carrying off our treasure. The long- 
boat was too small ; there would be con- 
siderable danger of its foundering, if we 
loaded it with gold ; besides, whither should 
we steer ? Yet, in spite of all, we decided to go 
to the plain, dig up the gold there and carry it 
near the long-boat, trusting for our future in 
the will of God. Thus it was, that, taking 
advantage of the days when the monkeys did 
not come, we visited the plain in the morning, 
and, at nightfall, brought home the gold we 
had amassed. Wc buried the precious stuff, in 
a hole we had dug for that purpose, near the 
long-boat. 

And so we did for the space of a whole year, 
at the end of which time we had got together 
a surprising hoard of gold. Meanwhile the 
monkeys did as before, coming one day and 
not the next. Our victuals were the fruit and 
water of the island. 

Such was our case, when there appeared a 
ship, going towards Oman or Siraf. It had 
encountered a gale of wind, and been swamped. 
The crew had flung the entire cargo over- 
board ; one by one, the larger number of 
its company had died of the sufferings they 
underwent. And, as soon as the residue 
caught sight of the island, they were anxious 
to land ; their weakness, however, kept them 
*64 



TIIE MARVELS OF INDIA 


where they lay. But, as they gazed upon 
the shore, they noticed us and our long-boat. 
Taking cables, several of them plunged into 
the sea and struggled to reach us. Seeing it, 
we also ran into the sea with cables, and, 
joining them, we knotted our ropes to theirs, 
and made them fast to the shore. Where- 
upon, two of us went aboard the ship, and 
there found the captain, sailors, and mer- 
chants, all half-dead from weariness and 
ready to succumb beneath the sufferings which 
had been inflicted on them by a stormy ocean, 
and the exhaustion, brought about by having 
to bale out the water, while they were upon the 
high seas. ‘ Get us ashore ’, they begged 
our companions, ‘ and take what is left of 
our belongings and merchandise ’. ‘ Haul us 

ashore ’, added the captain, ‘ and take the ship 
for your own ’. ‘ We can’t agree to that ’, our 
people replied. ‘ But we’ll drag you ashore, 
and you shall give us half the ship ’. ‘ With all 
the pleasure in the world ! ’ they answered as a 
single man. And, straightway, the agreement 
was ratified, in the presence of them all. ‘ One 
thing more ! ’ pursued our fellows. ‘ What is 
it ? ’ ‘ That we should be allowed to load our 
half of the ship with our cargo, without any- 
body seeing it or making any difficulty ’. 
‘ Agreed ’. ‘ And, of course, it is understood 
that our cargo will not harm the ship or make 
it founder ’, they continued. ‘ Very well ’, said 
the newcomers, ‘ and we call God to witness 
f 6f 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 

that we owe to you the safety of all that the 
furious sea has spared us 

Our companions landed again, and, at that 
moment, the troop of monkeys arrived. Seeing 
us pull on the cable to drag the ship ashore, 
they busied themselves, pulling by our sides. 
Quickly, we had drawn the ship in ; and the 
poor wretches on board flung themselves 
towards the land, like a lover on the object of 
his passion, so harshly had the sea dealt with 
them. Morning came, and we showed them 
the place where we were used to gather fruit. 
They ate and drank and plucked up spirit 
afresh. Next day, the monkeys returned with 
a present of gold, which we gave to the 
newcomers ; ourselves we had a sufficiency. 
Thereupon, we set ourselves to work, loading 
our gold into the half of the ship which 
belonged to us. The captain loaded the other 
half with gold, for himself and the merchants. 
And we victualled the ship with such pro- 
visions as the island could afford. Presently, a 
fair wind blew ; we set sail and reached the land 
of India. When the cargo had been shared out 
and each man had taken what accrued to him, 
every man’s portion was a million, one hundred 
and forty-four thousand mithcals. Since that 
day, we have given up sea-faring.” 

And so ends the most surprising story I have 
heard, which has to do with monkeys. 


66 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


XLI A person once told me, that, in 

some town or other, at a merchant’s house, he 
had seen a monkey which acted as his serving- 
man. The creature swept out the house, opened 
the door to visitors, shut it again, lit a fire under 
the pot, blew it up, added the necessary fuel, 
kept flies off the table, and fanned its master 
with a fan. 


XLII A smith of Thafa, a city of 

Yemen, had a monkey, which worked his 
bellows all day long. Thus had it served him 
for five years. I have been there several times, 
and seen the creature in his house. 


XLIII I have also been told the story 

of a monkey, which dwelt in the house of a 
citizen of Yemen. Its master one day bought 
a joint of meat, carried it home, and, by signs, 
entrusted it to the care of the monkey. But 
there came a kite, which snatched away the 
meat from under its eyes, to the monkey’s 
great dismay. Now, in the courtyard of the 
house, grew a tree. Up into this tree climbed 
the monkey, right to t]je very top. There it 

67 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


turned bottom upwards, presenting its but- 
tocks to the sky. It swung head down and laid 
hold with its two hands on certain portions of 
its rump. The kite supposed that it saw 
another piece of the stolen meat. Back it 
dropped again. The monkey nabbed it with 
both paws, and held it fast. Then down it 
climbed and secured the kite beneath a washing- 
tub, being careful to weight the tub with some 
heavy object or other. When the monkey’s 
master came home and saw the meat gone, he 
ran upon the monkey to chastise it. Straight 
to the tub hurried the monkey, and drew out 
the kite. Its master understood what had 
befallen. He took the kite, plucked it, and 
nailed it against the tree. 


XLIV There are other amusing stories 

told about the monkey-kind, and this is one 
of them. 

A citizen of Ispahan, an old man who had 
travelled widely, relates that he was going to 
Bagdad with a large caravan, which numbered 
among others a young man as vigorous and 
ardent as any mule. The old man used to 
watch at night, that he might the better guard 
his luggage, and only slept during the march, 
while he rode his camel. One night, watching 
as his custom was, he saw this young man 

68 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


make his way towards a camel-driver who lay 
asleep, approaching him from behind, and 
start toying and tampering. The camel -driver 
woke up, flew into a rage, and drubbed him 
like a workman tanning leather. The young 
man regained his place, staggering from the 
thumps and buffets he had received, and there 
stayed quiet till he felt his strength revive. 
Then, noticing the camel-driver fall asleep 
once more, back he came and renewed his 
previous attempt. Again the camel-dnvcr 
woke up, flew into an even greater fury, and 
gave him a terrible thrashing, so that the young 
man crept away half-dead. However, after 
lying down for some few minutes, a third time 
he approached the camel-driver, who set about 
him to such effect that he had the utmost 
difficulty in getting back to his place at all, 
dragging himself along the ground, this way 
and that, while, “ By God ”, the camel-driver 
protested, “ you try coming back again, and, 1 
swear. I’ll rip open your belly for you ! ” 

As a witness of these different encounters, 
continued the old man, I could not help think- 
ing that the camel-driver was within his rights ; 
but I should have hated to see the young man 
killed. So, as soon as he had come to his senses 
a little, 1 called to him and said : “ My son, 
what do you mean by behaving as I have seen 
you behave to-night ? Y ou have escaped from 
the hand of the camel-driver, but take care he 
doesn’t kill you, and do be more restrained ” 

69 



THE MARI TILS OF INDIA 

“ Good God, Uncle ”, he replied, “ many is 
the night that 1 have lain awake and never once 
closed my eyelids, such is the fever of my blood 
and the fire which devours me. When I am at 
this pass, the brutality of the camel-driver is as 
nothing, compared to the torments I suffer 
“ My son ”, 1 answered him, “ we are but a 
couple of days’ march from the City of Peace 
(Bagdad), which will provide the wherewithal 
to coo] your passions ”. Thus repeatedly I 
admonished him and, from a feeling of pity, 
f kept him at my side during the rest of the 
journey. Arrived in Bagdad, a keen anxiety on 
his behalf assailed me. “ Stranger that he is ”, 
1 said to myself, “ a young man who has never 
set foot in the town before, who knows he may 
not cast his eyes upon some woman of the 
Caliph’s or the Vizirs’ households, and engage 
her as briskly as he engaged the camel-driver ? 
That would be the end of him ”. It was this 
consideration prevented my leaving him. 1 
chose a lodging and installed him there with 
me ; and, once my luggage was carefully 
stowed, it seemed the first thing to do to 
take him visiting some bawd, who would, no 
doubt, be able to procure him a woman proper 
for satisfying his impetuous desires. 

We had hardly travelled the distance of a 
street, when my young man stopped short. 
“ Uncle ”, he said, “ up in that window, I have 
just seen a face like the sun in fairness. Mine it 
must be ”. I dissuaded him from any such idea. 

< 7 o 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


But down he plumped upon the ground and 
swore that there he would die. “ I looked after 
him in the desert ”, I reflected, “ and shall 1 
abandon him now in a city of perdition like 
Bagdad ? ” 

Since I could not get the idea out of his head, 
1 glanced about the street and saw a house 
which seemed the house of poor people. I 
knocked on the door, and an old woman 
appeared. 1 asked her to whom the other house 
belonged, where my companion had seen a 
woman’s face. “ It is the house of the Vizir 
So-and-So, and the young lady is his wife ”. 
“ My son ”, 1 said to the young man, “ do give 
up your plan and come with me, and I will 
show you the women of Bagdad. You’ll see 
others fairer than this one ”. “ 1 swear by 

God ”, he replied, “ I’ll either die or not go 
away without having her ”. 

The old woman spoke. “ Young man ”, said 
she, “ what will you give me, if I manage it so 
that you get your own way ? ” Straightway he 
whipped out his purse from his girdle, and 
counted ten pieces of gold into her palm. 
Evidently she was delighted and, slipping on a 
cloak, left her house and knocked on the 
Vizir’s door. The eunuch opened to her. She 
went in, and presently game back, saying : 
“ I have settled . your business for you and 
arranged terms “ And what are they ? ” 
enquired the young man, “ Fifty tnithcals for 
her, five forvthc service, and another five for 

7i' 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


the eunuch ”. He paid over the sixty mtbcals, 
and she returned to the Vizir’s house, came 
back again and said: “Off you go to the baths, 
change your clothes, and between the sunset 
and the evening-prayer, be standing by my door 
till they can let you in ”. 

The young man went away to the baths, 
dressed, and, at the appointed hour, took up his 
stand by the old woman’s door. The eunuch 
appeared and let him in. He was shown into a 
well-furnished room, where he was served 
with an exquisite meal. He ate. They offered 
him drink, and he drank. Thereupon he made 
for the bed, and the lady did so too. Both of 
them had just slipped off their clothes, when 
a monkey came out from behind a curtain, 
advanced on the young man, scratching and 
tearing his thighs and other sensitive parts of 
his body. Blood flowed. He huddled on his 
clothes again, and, stupid with drink, tumbled 
down fast asleep just as he was, fully clothed. 
At the break of day, the eunuch woke him up 
and said to him : “ Get away, before it is light 
enough to sec faces ”. So he retired, the prey 
of unspeakable mortification. 

However, the old man, when he saw day 
dawning, said to himself : “ I must go and see 
what has become of my young man, whether 
he got what he wanted, and if the affair has had 
a happy ending ”. He found the young man, 
sitting on the old woman’s doorstep, his head 
buried in his coat-collar, and fell to questioning 

72 



THE MARI' ELS OF INDIA 

him. The young man told him what had hap- 
pened. Then he called the old woman, and told 
her the story too. The old woman went to the 
lady’s house, that she might enquire the reason 
for this mishap. “ You must know ”, said the 
lady, “ that we overlooked one detail : we 
forgot to give the monkey, which belongs to 
the master of the house, its perquisite, — that is 
to say, a paper screw, containing a pound of 
sweets. But if the young man likes to try his 
luck again, we will only ask him the half of 
what he gave yesterday ”. 

So the old woman brought her message, and 
the young man paid her thirty dinars, and was 
specially enjoined to bring with him that 
evening at the appointed hour a paper, con- 
taining a pound of sweetmeats for the monkey. 
Instead of one, the young man bought several. 
He was admitted, went in, was served as he had 
been served the night before, ate, drank, and, 
when he was about to take his pleasure with 
the lady, again the monkey flew at him. But 
the young man tossed it a bag of sweets, and 
the monkey picked them up and returned to 
its post. 

His first ardour relieved, the young man began 
anew, and again the monkey appeared. A 
second bag of sweets diverted it, and this 
happened so often that at last the young man 
fell asleep, quite worn out. Then the monkey 
approached, roused him, and did its best to 
urge him towards the young lady, thrusting 

73 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


the while a finger into his clenched fist. The 
moral of the story is that, once the servant has 
been bribed, the master may be cuckolded 
under his own very nose. The monkey’s 
gesture signified : “ On with you, young man, 
on with you ! ” And really he did not give the 
young man a moment’s peace, continually 
inciting him to meddle with the young lady, 
till morning broke and the young man left the 
house and went about his business. 


XL I r Among the stories I have heard 

which deal with sailors and ship’s-captains, 
here is the story which they tell about Captain 
Abhara. He was born in Caraman, first of all 
worked as a shepherd, and kept the sheep in 
some village of that country. Then he became 
a fisherman, and presently a sailor, on ships 
which trafficked in the Indian Ocean. Later 
still, he embarked on a Chinese vessel. Finally, 
he rose to be a captain, scoured the sea in its 
length and breadth and seven times made the 
voyage to China. Before his time, no one had 
ever accomplished this journey without acci- 
dent. To reach China and not perish on the 
way, that, in itself, was regarded as a consider- 
able feat ; but, to come back again, safe and 
sound, was a thing unheard of ; and I have 
heard tell that no one else, except only him, 

74 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 

has made the two journeys, going and coming, 
entirely without mischance. 

(Once, when his ship was wrecked), he spent 
several days in the sea, on his matyal (?) with 
a skin of water. And, touching that incident, 
this is what is related by Captain Shahriari, one 
of the sailors of the China seas : 

“I was sailing”, he said, “from Siraf to 
China, and, betwixt Senf and the Chinese coast, 
not far from Sandal-Foulat, a promontory 
jutting into the Chinese Ocean, of a sudden the 
wind fell, leaving a dead calm. We anchored, 
and there stayed two days. On the third day, 
we caught sight of some object, in the distance, 
over the sea. I had the dinghy launched. And 
four sailors got down into it, with orders to 
reconnoitre this distant black mass. They set 
forth and returned. — ‘ Well, what is it ? ’ I 
asked them. ‘ Captain Abhara ’, they answered 
me, ‘ riding on his matyal, with a skin of 
water ’. ‘ Then why did you not bring him 

in ? ’ I asked them again. ‘ We wanted to 
they said, ‘ but he replied that he would not 
come aboard our ship, except as its captain and 
pilot, and on condition that he took as his 
salary a thousand dinars worth of merchandise 
in the currency of Siraf’. 

We were struck by these words, and I rowed 
out to him, with several sailors, and there I 
saw him riding the water, bobbing up and 
down at the caprice of the waves. We greeted 
him and begged him to come with us. ‘ You 

75 * 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


are much worse off than I am he said ; ‘ my 
position is far less dangerous. However, I will 
consent to come aboard, if you give me a 
thousand dinars worth of merchandise, in the 
currency of Siraf, and leave the management 
of the ship to me ’. ‘ The ship is richly laden ’, 
we said, ‘ both with merchandise and with 
valuables, and there is a large number of 
people aboard. It would be no bad thing to 
have Abhara’s advice, even at the price of a 
thousand dinars ’. 

So he followed us, and got on board with the 
water-skin and the dinghy. Hardly had he 
arrived, when ‘ Now give me my thousand 
dinars worth of merchandise ’, he demanded. 
It was given him. He stowed it carefully, 
and ‘ Out of the way ! ’ he ordered the captain. 
The captain retired, and gave up his place. 
‘ To work ’, he continued. ‘ Let us not have 
it said that we wasted time ’. ‘ But what must 
we do ? ’ we questioned him. ‘ Throw over- 
board everything heavy So we lightened 
the vessel of half its cargo or more. ‘ Cut 
down the main-mast he went on. And the 
main-mast was cut down and thrown into the 
sea. 

When morning came, ‘ Cut the cable of the 
biggest anchor ’, he told us, and it was cut and 
the anchor left in the sea. Then, one after 
another, he made us cast other anchors. Thus 
six were lost. And, on the third day, a strange- 
looking cloud rose before us, and presently 

76 



THE MARI 'ELS OF INDIA 

melted away into the sea, and the storm burst 
over us. Had it not been for the precautions 
we had taken, lightening the ship and cutting 
down the mast, we should have been swamped 
by the first wave which lifted us on its crest. 
The storm raged, without stopping, three 
days and three nights. The ship climbed and 
plunged, sailless, anchorless, driven we knew 
not where. But, next day, the wind slackened, 
and then there was a complete lull, and, at the 
end of the day, the sea was calm once more. 
From the morning of the fifth day, the sea was 
smooth and the wind favourable. We set up a 
new mast, stretched the sails, and the ship went 
forward again, spared by God. We arrived at 
the land of China, where the ship was repaired 
and a fresh mast made, in place of the mast we 
had cast into the sea. We stayed in China as 
long as was necessary for our commerce, and 
then set sail for Siraf. 

Now, when we had come, according to our 
calculations, up with the place where we had 
originally taken Abhara on board, there we saw 
an island. ‘ Cast the anchor ’, said Abhara. 
That done, the long-boat was launched, and 
five men got down into it. ‘ Go to that island ”, 
he said, ‘ and bring back the anchor you find 
there ’. And, in fact, the sailors did find an 
anchor, and brought it back. 

And, on two further occasions, Abhara gave 
the same order, and three of the six anchors we 
had previously lost were recovered. 

77 



THE MA1U 'ELS OF INDIA 

Thence the vessel sailed on its way. 

We questioned Abhara about this business of 
the anchors. ‘ When I met you he said, ‘ it 
was the thirtieth day (of the moon), when the 
tide is highest, and your vessel was floating 
over this island. I made you throw the 
heaviest part of your cargo into the sea. Then, 
reflecting that, at a pinch, we could do without 
anchors in China, and that what was left of the 
merchandise was worth far more than the 
anchors, which were just as heavy, I made you 
throw them overboard too, since the ship must 
be lightened at all costs. Three of the six 
anchors stayed caught on the prominence of 
the island, and were saved for us, and three 
tumbled into the depths ’. ‘ But how he was 
asked, ‘ could you predict the fall of the water- 
level, and the storm ? ’ ‘I and others ’, he 
replied, ‘ have crossed this sea before ; and we 
have noticed that on every thirtieth day (of the 
moon) its level drops in an extraordinary 
fashion, till it leaves these prominences un- 
covered. At the same time, a violent storm 
bursts, rising from the deep. The ship, on 
which I was sailing, was wrecked against one 
of these peaks. While we were spending the 
night on the island, the water rose again, and 
I escaped on this matyal. If you had stayed an 
hour longer at the spot where I met you before 
the storm, your ship would have struck and 
broken up ’ 

Abhara had travelled widely and had many 

78 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


adventures, of which this is one of the most 
singular. 


XLVI A sailor has informed me that 

there runs between Khanfou, a township of 
Little China, and Khamdan, township of 
Greater China, — which of the two Chinas is 
the more remarkable, — a powerful-flowing 
river, broader than the Tigris at Basra ; and 
that, here and there, along the shores of this 
stream are mountains of lodestone. Thus it is 
that vessels which contain iron fittings cannot 
be used, since the mountains attract it. Horse- 
men, when they traverse these mountains, ride 
unshod horses ; their saddles have no iron 
trappings ; the horses’ bits and the stirrups are 
made of wood. 


XLVII I have it from a pilot, named 

Imran, son of the Lame One, that, being set 
out from Oman on a ship, together with 
several others which were going to Jeddah, in 
the year 325, they were overtaken by a violent 
storm and forced to throw into the water a part 
of their cargo. “ A number of ships ”, he told 
me, “ stayed behind and the others continued 

79 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


their voyage. When we were midway between 
Kamram and ...(?) we encountered a fright- 
ful gale of wind, which snapped our anchors, 
drove us out of our anchorage, and carried us 
away. There were in our company several 
ships of Aden, Ghalafqa, and Athar, and, 
among others, a djabala of Ghalafqa, a mag- 
nificent vessel and quite new. I saw it driven 
by wind and waves onto a peak, jutting from 
the sea, and presently swamped. It capsized 
and those on board perished to a man.” 


XLVIII Among memorable stories 
which have to do with sailors, here is the 
story, told me about Merdabsha, one of the 
ship’s-captains who sail to the pepper-growing 
lands and other parts. This Merdabshah had 
reached the age of seventy without begetting 
children. However, a child was born to him, 
whom he called El-Merzeban. It was his 
darling, and he carried it along with him on 
his ship and the mother too. Now, one day he 
was sailing in the Sea of Barnan, making 
towards Koulam, when he bade its mother, 
who was in the cabin, give him his child. So 
she put it in his arms, and he amused himself, 
dandling the nurseling and bouncing it up and 
down, till sunset. But, just at that moment, the 
wind began to blow a gale and one of the masts 

80 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


snapped clean off. He made as if to give the 
child back to its mother, and, in his hurry, 
dropped it overboard without noticing what 
he did. A storm blew up, and he was busied 
with the management of the ship, till the hour 
of the morning-prayer was come. At dawn the 
sea was calm again and the vessel once more 
at peace ; whereupon, he seated himself and 
asked them to give him back the child. “ But 
you have had it since nightfall ”, protested its 
mother. At these words, the old fellow tore his 
beard and beat his head. He searched all over 
the ship. “ I must tell you ”, the helmsman 
remarked, “ that, ever since yesterday evening, 
the rudder has been heavy under my hand. 
Look at it ”. They looked, and there, upon 
the front of the rudder, they noticed a mass 
which did not stir. It was the child ; straight- 
way, a man climbed down and rescued the 
child, unharmed. He handed it to its mother, 
who offered the nurseling her breast ; and the 
child fell to sucking peacefully. It was then 
fifteen months old. 

“ I used to know this Merzeban, the old man’s 
child ”, Ismailouia informed, “ when he was 
seventy years old and more. He had been 
haled before the Cadi of Oman as many as 
thirteen times, on some dispute about money, 
and all upon the same day. He passed, so they 
told me, for the least fair-dealing of captains. 
In his ship, he treated merchants, as men, who 
regard their obligations, do not treat them ”. 

G 8l 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


XLIX Many are they who have 

spoken to me about Said, the basket-maker, 
surnamcd the Just, and related the origin of 
the fortune, which he left his children. These 
different narratives concur in the story I am 
going to unfold. Said was a man of holy life, 
who dwelt at Aden. He wove baskets and 
other utensils which are made of palm-leaves. 
He was an assiduous frequenter of the mosque, 
and offered up all his orisons there. And he 
had three sons, whose way of life was very 
little different from his own. 

Now a sailor, of his acquaintance, had fitted 
out a ship to go to Kalah ; and, when he was 
upon the point of departure, he visited him and 
said : “ Give me some commission, I beg 

you ”. Said bought a green pitcher, worth half 
a dirhem , and a daneq of salt, which he put in the 
pitcher. “ There is my merchandise ”, he said. 
“ And what shall I buy you ? ” the sailor asked. 
“ Bring me home a blessing, as they say ”. 

Well, the ship set forth, arrived at Kalah, and 
sold its cargo ; and the captain thought no 
more of Said’s pitcher. However, one day, 
when a new cargo had been shipped and their 
departure was imminent, the captain noticed a 
man in the market-place of Kalah, who held a 
fish on the end of a string and cried : “ Who’ll 
buy a Blessing ? ” At these words, the captain 
remembered the pitcher Said had given him. 
“ What is that ? ” he demanded of the man 

o 

82 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


with the fish. “ A kind of fish which fishermen 
call a Blessing ”, the fellow replied. “ Good 
Lord ”, thought the sailor, “ that must be 
what my friend Said meant ”. So he bought 
the fish for two oqnes weight of salt. He bade 
the huckster wait, and sent off a man to the 
ship, who brought back the pitcher intact. 
Then he handed over the weight of salt they 
had agreed upon, and carried the fish to his 
lodging. They prepared to salt the fish with 
the salt left in the pitcher. But, on cleaning it, 
they found some bard substance within, and, 
splitting it open, it was an oyster-shell they 
saw, and inside was a big pearl. “ So that is 
what God has sent Said ! ” exclaimed the 
captain. The fish was duly salted, and the 
pearl set apart ; they weighed anchor and 
the ship reached Aden without accident. The 
captain gave Said his pearl, but Said did not 
live long after receiving it. And, when he was 
dead, his youngest son possessed himself of it, 
and carried it to Sarra-manra, where he found 
the Caliph, who was then El-Motamed, to 
whom he sold it for an hundred thousand 
dirhems , though, in fact, it was worth more 
than twice as much. 


L A native of Siraf relates how, 

while he was crossing freyii Siraf to Kalah, his 

83 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 

ship foundered on the high seas, and he 
managed to save his life by clinging to a piece 
of wood. More than ten days was he afloat, 
and then was cast up upon an island, which 
was rich in abundance of trees, fruit, and 
bananas. There he stayed some time, eating the 
fruit he found and drinking from springs of 
sweet water. But, presently, he grew weary of 
the place, and set off, walking straight in front 
of him for several days. Thus he came to a 
cultivated region, where he found plantations 
of dourah, rice, and other useful vegetables, 
lie caught sight of a hut and, drawing near, 
saw an empty water-cistern. He was tired out 
and entered the hut to rest. He was asleep, 
when up came a man, driving a yoke of bulls, 
laden with twelve skins of water, which he 
took and emptied into the cistern. Then 
he sat down to snatch a moment’s rest. The 
traveller got up to drink the water. He 
examined the cistern and found that its walls 
were polished as smooth as the blade of a 
sword ; yet it was neither made of pottery nor 
of glass. He questioned the man with the bulls 
about this cistern, and he answered him : “ It 
is the quill of a bird’s feather ”. The traveller 
was incredulous ; the man went to the cistern 
and rubbed it within and without. Whereupon 
he saw that it was transparent and on both 
sides showed the trace of feathers. Fie added 
that there were birds whose feathers were 
still bigger. 


84 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


LI Now this is a fact with which 

sailors are perfectly familiar ; I have never 
yet met the man who questioned its accuracy. 

A ship, bound for China, was wrecked upon 
the high seas. Six or seven of the company 
escaped death by clinging to the tackle. After 
some days, they landed on an island, where 
they stayed several months. They were nearly 
perishing of ennui, when, one day, while they 
lay discoursing together by the edge of the sea, 
they saw a bird light down on the ground, 
about the bigness of a bull. “ We are sick of 
our life here ”, they exclaimed ; “ come, let us 
all engage this bird. If it kills us with its beak 
and claws, well, that will be the end of us ; but, 
supposing we manage to get the better of it, 
then we will cut its throat, and we can cook 
and eat it ”. 

So against the bird they rushed. Some of 
them clung round its shanks ; others fastened 
round its neck ; and others belaboured it with 
bits of wood. And thus they did, until it was 
dead. Then, knocking two stones one upon 
another, thence they fashioned knives, where- 
with they bled the carcase. They plucked it, 
kindled a bonfire, flung in the bird, turning it to 
right and left. And, when it was cooked, they 
sat on the ground and feasted on its flesh. 

That evening, they regaled themselves again. 
But, next morning, going to the sea in order to 
perform their ablutions, and rubbing over 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


their bodies, lo, all their hair fell off. Not a 
single hair remained upon their skin, and it 
became as smooth as the skin of a little child. 
There were three old men among their number, 
who found themselves grown equally bald. 
“ It was the bird’s flesh did it ”, they said, 
“and made our hair fall off. No doubt it was 
poisoned. We shall die to-day, every man, and 
see the end of our labours ”. Yet, in the 
evening they were still enjoying good health ; 
and so it was on the next day too, and on the 
days following. Five days later, their hair 
began to come back, and, at a month’s end, it 
was as thick as ever, black and glossy, and 
showed no further signs of whitening. Then, 
a month after that, or thereabouts, they sighted 
a ship. They signalled to it, and it came to 
their rescue and took them off. They were all 
able to reach home and tell their story. Such 
an one, who had been known as an old man, 
coming back with a raven beard, was obliged 
to make himself known by particular marks he 
had on his body. And, thereafter, their hair 
did not grow white. 


LII A pilot tells me that, in the Sea 

of Samarkand — which is the sea bordering on 
Herkend, and so called, as they say, because the 
river of Samarkand runs into it, — there are to 

'86 



THE MART 'ELS OF INDL4 


be seen many fishes of the kind named Fal, 
which is the biggest fish of the ocean. He him- 
self had seen one, and put its length at two 
hundred ells. It could be seen from far off, 
and they took its flukes, lifted high out of the 
water, to be the sails of a ship, till they had 
drawn sufficiently close to distinguish them for 
what they were. On its back, was a mass of 
rubble and earth, which had accumulated 
during the years and formed a stony crust, so 
hard that neither iron nor anything else could 
make any impression. Around it, to right and 
to left, before and behind, swam a multitude of 
little fishes, which never quitted its side. They 
say that both the male and the female carry 
eggs in their belly, which grow larger there ; 
only, those of the male are sterile, while the 
female’s produce young. 


LIII Among the marvels of the seas 

is a bird, which dwells in the confines of Malt, 
an island near Senf and Serira. They say that 
it makes a nest at the entrance of some creek, 
lays its eggs therein, and sits hatching them 
forty days, at the end of which time it throws 
them into the water. There it stays twenty 
days, living on fish. And, when the twenty 
days have gone by, the little birds come out of 
the eggs and rejoin their parents, who foster 

*7 



THE MAE HEES OF INI 


them under their wings and feed ther 
have grown their plumage. Then t 
lings come and go, and pick up the. 
themselves ; the parent birds leave 
their own devices. A brood never e 
number of three. 

The inhabitants of the Isle of Ma' 
never a ship puts in there. Such shi| 
their way thither are driven by a vi 
of wind ; and, as soon as the shi 
against the land, the passengers 
themselves into the water upon bin 
and other objects which will support 
the waves toss them about and, £i 
them ashore. As for the ship, the 
it away, were it secured by an hundrec 
it is carried into deep waters and 
pieces. Likewise the merchants’ bal 
up on the beach, where every man pi< 
own again. And, when they wish to ] 
build a new ship. All goods taker 
country are carefully wrapped in j 
the water may not spoil them, afte 
has split. 


LITE Hassan, son of Oma 

that, in Mansoura, he saw people i 
Cashmere. Their country is situated 
days’ journey by land from Mansoi 

88 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


they also come down on the Mihran, which 
runs from Cashmere, in as large a stream as the 
Tigris and the Euphrates in flood, on bales of 
costus, weighing each of them seven or eight 
hundred wens , and swathed in skins, smeared 
with pitch so as to make them waterproof. Of 
these bales, collected and bound together, they 
make a kind of raft, whereon they install them- 
selves and float down the Mihran, putting in at 
the port of Mansoura, after a journey of forty 
days, without the costus coming to any harm 
by the water. 


LV A person, who has lived in 

India, tells me that in that country there are 
charmers. Such an one of these charmers will 
go out into the country and, catching sight of 
some birds high up in the air, trace a circle 
beneath them. The birds fly about over the 
circle for a while, but presently tumble down 
into it ; and there they stay. Then the charmer 
enters his circle, takes the birds he wants and 
lets the others go. Likewise, he sees animals 
pasturing on the plain, compasses them from a 
distance with a line, walks round them, with- 
out their, any of them, being able to escape, 
and, entering, takes which he pleases. 


89 



THE MARI 'ELS OF INDIA 


L FT Somebody, who had seen 

people of this kind at Dadaboura, once told 
me that such another charmer would go to 

<v> 

the mouth of the river, carrying a piece of 
wood, over which he had performed some 
magic ceremony, and throw it into the water. 
The wood floated away, then, at a certain point, 
stopped and budged no further. The charmer 
got on board a skiff, went out to the place 
where the piece of wood had paused, drew 
thence a crocodile and slew it. The mouth of 
this river does, in fact, teem with crocodiles. 
And they say that the crocodiles never attack 
a man within the town ; but that, if a man goes 
without the town and so much as trails his 
finger in the water, he is snapped up by one of 
them. The citizens of Serira pretend that they 
have a talisman against crocodiles. 


LVII Somebody, who encountered in 

India many persons addicted to divination, 
has related to me, how a native of Siraf, wish- 
ing to go from Samour to Soubada by land, 
requested the governor to furnish him with a 
guide. The governor gave him one of his 
bataks or rural messengers ; and, with him, 
the Sirafian set out. Now, when they had come 
in view of Dhimour, they sat down by a thelab 

9 ° 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


or pool, near a djeratu or garden, to eat a bite ; 
and, among the food they ate, was something 
which contained rice. A raven croaked over- 
head. Said the Indian to the man of Siraf : 
“ Do you know what that raven is saying ? ” 
“No”, replied the other. “He is saying: 
c 1 shall eat the rice you are eating ; never 
doubt it ’ ”. “ That surprised me ”, remarked 
the Sirafian, telling the story afterwards, “ for 
we had finished the rice, and not a grain of it 
was left. We got up, and once more set forth. 
But, hardly had we covered two parasangs, 
when we fell in with a company of five Indians. 
As soon as the messenger saw them, he showed 
signs of the keenest perturbation. ‘ I am going 
to have a fight with those fellows ’, he told me. 
‘ Why ? ’ I asked him. ‘ There is an old quarrel 
between us ’, he replied. And scarcely had he 
told me what he meant to do before the Indians 
whipped out their khandjars , hurled themselves 
against him all together, and made an end of 
him. They ripped open his stomach, and his 
entrails ran onto the ground. As for me, I was 
overcome by such terror as deprived me of the 
power to run away, and I tumbled to the earth, 
almost senseless. ‘ You needn’t be afraid 
they assured me, and they left me there and 
went off. While they were going, a raven 
alighted upon the messenger’s body, which I 
presumed was the same, whose croaking we 
had already heard. It set about picking up the 
rice, which ran out of his entrails ”. 


91 



THE MARVELS OE INDIA 


LVIII Among curious stories, which 

have to do with merchants, travellers, and 
persons who have made their fortunes upon 
the sea, is that of Ishaq, son of the Jew. He 
got his living with the brokers at Oman, and, 
following a dispute which he had with a Jew, 
he left Oman and went to India. His sole 
property did not exceed a sum of about two 
hundred dinars , and, after an absence of thirty 
years, during which time no news of him was 
received, he came back to Oman, in the year 
300, arriving from China, as I am assured by 
several sailors of my acquaintance, on a ship 
which belonged to him, as well as its entire 
cargo. In order to avoid the customs and the 
payment of the tithe, he came to an arrange- 
ment with the Governor of Oman, Ahmed, son 
of Helal, which involved a sum of more than a 
million dirhems. On a single occasion, he sold 
Ahmed, son of Merwan, a hundred thousand 
mithcals worth of musk of the finest quality, 
and the buyer judged that it was all he had. 
And, to the same buyer, he disposed of forty 
thousand dinars worth of striped stuffs, and, to 
another, twenty thousand dinars worth. And, 
at the plea of Ahmed, son of Merwan, he 
agreed to an abatement of a silver dirhem in 
the mithcal, thus writing off some hundred 
thousand dirhems. 

Such a prodigious fortune made a noise about 
the country, and roused the envious. A 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 

mischievous person, whose request had been 
refused by Ishaq, went to Bagdad and, seeking 
out the Vizir, Ali, son of Mohammed, son of 
El-Farat, laid false information before him 
against the Jew. The Vizir turned a deaf ear ; 
whereupon, the fellow addressed himself to 
one of the familiars of the Caliph, Moqtadir- 
Billah, assumed a sanctimonious air, and 
related his version of the Jew’s history. A man, 
he said, had left Oman without anything, and 
had come back on a ship, laden with a million 
dinars worth of musk, as well as silks and 
porcelain of equal value, and quite as much 
again in jewellery and stones, not counting a 
whole heap of marvellous objects of Chinese 
workmanship. The possessor was an old man 
without children, he added. Ahmed, son of 
Helal, had levied a toll on him of live hundred 
thousand dinars worth of merchandise. All 
this was duly reported to the Caliph, who was 
much surprised and straightway despatched one 
of his eunuchs, called Black Pepper, with three 
attendants, bearing a message to the governor, 
bidding him give over the Jew into the hands 
of the eunuch, and to himself send him a 
messenger. And, when the eunuch had 
arrived at Oman and Ahmed, son of Helal, was 
informed of the Caliph’s orders, he com- 
manded that the Jew was to be seized, mean- 
while secretly warning the merchants of it, 
letting them remark how the Jew’s arrest 
threatened them all, whether they were 

93 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 

citizens or strangers, doing business there, 
who were thus exposed to the envy and malice 
of every miserable wretch. And, thereupon, 
the markets closed. Papers of protest were 
signed by the people of the town and by 
strangers, declaring that, after the Jew had been 
arrested, ships would no longer put in at Oman, 
the merchants would leave, and that they would 
advise others by no means to land on the coast 
of Iraq, where a man’s property was not safe. 
They added that Oman was a town, wherein 
dwelt many rich merchants of great substance, 
from every land, and that they had no other 
safeguard, besides the continuance of the 
Caliph’s justice and the justice of his Emir, his 
consideration for merchants and the protection 
he afforded them against envious and mis- 
chievous people. 

The merchants made an uproar in the city, 
set up a cry against Ahmed, son of Hclal, and 
began a disturbance, to such effect that Black 
Pepper, the eunuch, and his henchmen, were 
inclined to take their departure and bade the 
governor good-bye. 

Ahmed wrote to the Caliph and told him what 
had passed, as how the merchants had brought 
their ships to the quay-side and put on board 
their goods, with the purpose of removing 
them, and how the business men, who lived in 
the city, had been in the greatest perturbation 
and had exclaimed : “ We shall be deprived of 
all means of livelihood, when ships put in 

94 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 

here no more ; Oman is a place, whose 
citizens get everything from the sea. Sultans 
are like fires, which eat up all they touch. We 
can’t resist them, and our best plan is to take 
ourselves out of their way ”. 

The eunuch and his men squeezed two 
thousand dinars from the Jew, and then 
retired. In his indignation, the Jew hurried all 
his possessions together, put them on ship- 
board and set sail again for China, without 
leaving a dinar behind in Oman. At Scrira, the 
governor asked him a trifle of twenty thousand 
dinars , as his due, on the condition he let him 
pursue his way to China. The Jew refused to 
give a penny ; so the Sahib sent secret agents 
against him, who killed him. And he possessed 
himself of his ship and all his goods. 

Ishaq had stayed three years at Oman. 
Persons, who saw him there, tell me that, on 
the day of Mihrdjan, he made Ahmed, son of 
Helal, the present of a vase of black china, 
shut with a lid of gold. “ What is in this 
vase ? ” Ahmed asked. “ A dish of sekbadj I 
cooked you in China ”, replied the Jew. 
“ Sekbadj cooked in China ! Two years old ! 
It must be in a bad way by now ”. Ahmed 
took off the lid and opened the vase. There was 
a golden fish, with ruby eyes, garnished with 
musk of the finest quality. The contents of the 
vase was worth fifty thousand dinars. 


95 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


LIX Among the curiosities which 

the Jew related of China, I will set down the 
following : 

44 I visited, ” he said, “ a town of that country, 
called Lauin. To get there, you have to cross 
a range of precipitous mountains. Merchandise 
is carried thither on the backs of goats, for the 
road, which traverses these abrupt heights, 
resembles a scries of stairways, that only goats 
are capable of negotiating. The King of Lauin 
was a prince both powerful and respected. 
When 1 presented myself before him, he was 
seated on a golden throne, set with rubies, and 
was himself loaded with jewellery, just like a 
woman. His queen was at his side, even more 
richly tricked out. Round his neck were chains 
of gold and emeralds, of inestimable price, of 
such as the kings-of-kings of East and West 
have not the equal. Near him, stood some five 
hundred young girls of every colour, dressed 
in silk, with ornaments. He greeted me. 4 O 
Arab he asked me, ‘ have you seen any- 
thing finer than this ? ’ showing me one of 
his chains, incrusted with precious stones. 
‘ Yes I answered him. 4 How is that ? ’ 4 1 
have a pearl of incomparable worth ’, I con- 
tinued, ‘ which I bought at a great price to do 
you homage ’. ‘ Quick ! Go and fetch it ’, he 
ordered. ‘ That was my sole purpose in coming 
here I went on, 4 and to-night I . . .’ 4 No ! 
No ! ’ he interrupted me, in a pleased and 

96 



THE MARI 'ELS OF INDE1 


satisfied tone. ‘ Bring it here now ! At once ! ’ 
As a matter of fact, I had ten of them. I ran off 
to my lodging and, taking nine, I pounded 
them, under a stone, to a powder the con- 
sistency of flour, and scattered it upon the 
ground. The remaining pearl I wrapped in a 
handkerchief, and, winding it round and round 
several times, and knotting the handkerchief 
carefully, 1 took it to the king. Arrived in his 
presence again, I began to undo the bundle, 
untying and unwrapping it very slowly. The 
king drew near, and the queen stood over me, 
bidding me hurry. v\t last, I set the pearl under 
their eyes. The king knelt down before it, and 
so did the queen. They bought it from me, at an 
exorbitant price ”. 


EX Sailors are generally agreed 

that the Sea of Berira, which stretches for seven 
hundred parasangs and is on the way to the 
land of the Zindjs, is among the most danger- 
ous of seas. On one side is a range of big 
islands, where the current runs very strong. 
Ships cross it in seven or eight days. When a 
ship goes ashore in the confines of Berira, the 
blackamoors geld its company. And, when 
merchants journey to Berira, each of them, 
according to his means and the position he 
occupies, takes with him an escort for his 
h 97 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


protection, lest the natives seize and geld him. 
These negroes make a collection of the 
proceeds of such onslaughts upon travellers. 
They keep them, and flaunt them about to 
excite one another’s envy. With them, a 
man’s prowess is adjudged from the num- 
ber of travellers he has dealt with in this 
fashion. 


LXI Among seas which are difficult, 

dangerous, and where navigation is a trouble- 
some business, whence the issue is hard, comes 
the sea of th egobbs of Serendib, which measures 
three hundred parasangs long. It abounds in 
crocodiles. The shores are infested by tigers. 
It is scoured by big craft, and the pirates, who 
man them, attack ships and eat men falling into 
their hands. The natives of this coast are quite 
the wickedest of all mankind ; nowhere else 
do you find the like. A nasty place ! Is a ship, 
crossing these seas, captured by the pirates, the 
men are taken and eaten ; does it founder, its 
shipwrecked crew is eaten by the crocodiles ; 
and, supposing it is wrecked near the land, do 
the poor wretches manage to get ashore, they 
are the prey of tigers, who rend them to bits in 
an instant. 



THE MARI 'ELS OF INDIA 


LXII Touching singular customs, 

widespread throughout India, Hassan, son of 
Amr, tells me that he heard a sheik, a well- 
informed man, who had travelled the country, 
relate the story which follows. 

One of the great kings of India was sitting 
down, taking a meal. Before him was a parrot 
in its cage. Said the king : “ Come and eat 
with me ”. “ I am frightened of cats ”, replied 
the parrot. “ No matter ”, answered the king. 
“ I will be your balaitdjer ”, — that is to say, in 
the Indian tongue, “ I engage myself to suffer 
the like of anything that may happen to you ”. 
And this is how the above expression was 
explained by the old man. The kings of India 
have about their persons a company of men, 
which is more or less numerous, according to 
their degree of magnificence and the conse- 
quence of their state. These men say to the 
king : “ We are your balaudjers ”. He makes 
them eat rice with him, and gives them betel 
from his own hand. Each hacks off his little 
finger, and sets it before the king. And, from 
that moment on, they follow him about, 
wherever he goes, eat what he eats and drink 
what he drinks. They superintend his food, 
and overlook everything which has to do with 
him. No concubine is brought to his bed, 
whether it be girl or boy, but they, first of all, 
examine them thoroughly ; no carpet is spread 
for his feet, till they have inspected it. The 

99 



THE MARVELS OE INDIA 

king is served with no drink nor dish, but they 
insist it should be, first of all, tasted by who- 
ever brings it. And thus they do, in every 
instance, where the king might be exposed to 
some danger. If he dies, they commit suicide ; 
if he burns, they cast themselves into the 
flames ; if he falls ill, they mis-handle them- 
selves in order to share his sufferings. When a 
battle is fought, in the attack, they cluster 
round him and never leave his side. Only men 
of distinguished family, who arc themselves 
comely and valiant and of good understanding, 
are admitted among the balaudjers. And that is 
how the word balaudjer is explained. 

So when the king said to the parrot : “I am 
your balaudjer ”, he also took and ate a little of 
the parrot’s rice. And, without hesitation, the 
bird hopped down from his cage, and set himself 
at table with the king. Along came a cat 
and snapped off the parrot’s head. The king 
took the parrot’s dead body, and laid it in 
a porcelain vase, together with camphor, 
aromatic spices, betel, chalk, and pepper. 
Then he beat on a drum, and traversed the 
city and the ranks of his army, carrying this 
vase in his hand. And, thereafter, so he did 
every day, going through his dominions with 
the vase. And this went on for years. At last, 
his balaudjers and other important subjects of 
the kingdom approached him and said : “ Your 
behaviour is unseemly. It has gone on too 
long. Do your duty, or we shall be obliged to 


IOO 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


arrange for your deposition and take another 
king And, in fact, whoever says, “ I am your 
balaudjer ”, and fails to comply with the 
obligations he has thus imposed upon himself, 
such a man becomes, according to the usage of 
the Hindus, bahinda or ahinda , which, in their 
parlance, is the name given to any man who, 
by reason of weakness, inability, or baseness 
of spirit, does not fulfil his obligations. Kings 
are no more exempt from this rule, than other 
men. 

So, when the king saw this, he dug a pit and 
filled it with aloes wood, sandal, sa/it, set fire 
to it and flung himself therein. He was burned, 
and his balaudjer s jumped in and were burned 
with him, to the number of some two thousand. 
And thus it came about, all because the king had 
said to his parrot : “ I will be your balaudjer ”. 


LXIII The same informant has told 

me, that, in Serendib, the kings and their train 
have themselves carried about in handouls , 
which resemble a litter and are borne upon 
the shoulders of several footmen. At the side, 
a servant carries a golden plate, containing 
leaves of betel and anything the occupant needs. 
And thus he goes his round of business, among 
his attendants, seated in the equipage described 
above, chewing betel and spitting into a 


IOI 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


spittoon. And, as often as the need comes upon 
him, out he gets from his handout and relieves 
nature, just wherever he finds himself, without 
pausing, as he walks along the road ; and, 
when he has done, he puts his member away 
again, without bothering to wipe it dry. 


EXIN And Hassan, son of Amr, also 

told me that, at Scndan, he had seen a Hindu, 
as he was going close by some house, get his 
clothes and body wet with urine the people of 
the house were throwing out. He stopped and 
“ Ugh ! ” he cried, “ was that water somebody 
has washed his hands in, or used to rinse his 
mouth ? ” For it is that they consider filthiest. 
He was answered that, no, it was the water 
of a child. “ Kama ”, he remarked, which 
is interpreted “ Well and good ! ” and so 
went on his way. In their estimation, urine is 
less nasty than water in which the hands or the 
mouth have been washed. 


LXV And, as often as a native of this 

country has relieved a necessity of the major 
order, he goes, to put himself to rights, down 
to the thaladj , a pool, fed by the rain-water 

^02 



THE MARl'ETX OF INDIA 


which flows from the mountains and the plain, 
in bad weather, and, once his business is d< >nc, 
he takes a mouthful of this water, garbles, 
climbs out of the water, and spits his mouthful 
back into the pool. 


EX HI The same Hassan has told me 

that, according to someone who had been to 
Serendib and had stayed there, the king has a 
customs-house, established on the coast, where 
merchandise is assessed for the duty it has to 
pay. 


LX HI I A sailor has given me an extra- 

ordinary account of the serpents of Koulam- 
Meli. There is one, called the nagheran , which 
bears a green crest upon its head, shaped like 
a cross. This reptile rears its head an ell or 
two from the ground, according to its size, 
and swells it, beneath the scales, till it has 
attained to the bigness of the head of a dog. 
When it is in flight, none can overtake it ; 
when it is in pursuit, none can escape. When it 
bites, it kills. At Koulam-Mcli dwells a Musul- 
man, a man of holy life, in Indian parlance 
called Bensi, who heals this serpent’s bite. 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


Nearly all his patients recover. He also gives 
treatment for the bites of other serpents and 
vipers. Magicians, of course, are not lacking 
among the Indian ; but the magical treatment 
of the Musulman is invariably successful. 

“ One day ”, the sailor told me, “ I was in his 
company, when they brought him a man who 
had been bitten by the nagheran. There was also 
an Indian, whose magic learning was renowned; 
he set to work, casting spells for the recovery 
of the wounded man. The Musulman, on his 
side, cast spells for the fellow’s death ; and, 
sure enough, he died ”. 


LXVIII Under other circumstances, I 
have seen the Musulman heal not a few, who 
had been bitten by this serpent or by some 
other. In Koulam-Meli is a kind, which is 
little and has two heads, one smaller than its 
fellow. They call it batar. When it gapes with 
its littler mouth, you would say it was the beak 
of a sparrow. If it bites with either head, it 
does so in the flickering of an eyelid. 


LXIX “ I have made in a gobb of 

Serendib ”, Mohammed, son of Balishad, told 


104 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


me, “ curious observations to do with serpents 
and magicians. When a man is bitten by a viper 
or by a serpent, the magicians perform over 
him, and, supposing their treatment does not 
produce good results, they place the sick man 
in a litter of branches and push him out into 
midstream of a river, which flows through 
their country towards the sea, and along which 
their houses are built or the houses of most of 
them, at least. Since everyone knows that only 
persons suffering from snake-bite are put in 
such a litter, everybody who is at all versed in 
magical arts draws it ashore and performs 
magical operations over the patient. If the 
operation succeeds, then the man gets up and 
goes home upon his own legs. And, if it is 
unsuccessful, he is once more pushed out into 
the stream ; and thus it goes on, all along the 
banks of the river, till he has traversed the 
entire country. Then, if none of the magical 
operations he has undergone have proved 
efficacious, the sick man is carried down to 
the sea, where he is drowned, unless he has 
previously been able to get up. For it is not the 
usage that he should be left on dry land, nor 
that his family should shelter and nurse him. 
If he takes a turn for the better, he goes home 
on foot ; if the enchantments, to which he is 
subjected, profit him nothing, then he dis- 
appears 




105 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


LXX “ Once upon a time ”, Moham- 

med, son of Balishad, also told me, “ I was 
passing close by one of the rivers of the gobbs , 
which flow into the sea, and where the ebb and 
flow of the tide is particularly strong. The 
tide was at its lowest, and the beaches on 
either side were quite uncovered. On the 
level of the water, sitting upon the sand, I 
noticed an old woman, very decently dressed. 
‘ What are you doing there ? ’ I inquired of her. 
‘ I am an old woman ’, she replied ; * I have 
had my bellyful of this world, and now I want 
to rest in the bosom of my Lord.’ ‘ But why 
ever are you sitting here ? ’ ‘I am waiting ’, 
she said, ‘ for the tide to come back and take 
me off’. And so she stayed, squatting down in 
the same place, till the tide came in again and 
overcame and drowned her”. 


LXXI A traveller told me that, in 

India, he had seen a succession of people come 
down to the water to drown themselves. They 
hired someone to drown them, lest their fright, 
and the perturbation they were in, should 
prevent them committing suicide of their own 
accord. Each of them paid a fellow to put his 
hand on their head and keep it under the water 
till they were drowned. If they yelled out and 

*106 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


begged for mercy, the fellow took care not to 
heed them. 


LXXII A traveller, who had pene- 

trated the land of Sahal, told me that, in the 
Island of Baqar, situated between the Island of 
Screndib and Mandourin, which is one of the 
principal islands in the vicinity of Schilan 
(Ceylon), he had seen a monstrous Indian 
idol ; and the Indians said that this idol of 
the Island of Baqar stayed a thousand years 
in each island, and was then transported to 
another. 


LXXIII “ At Serira ”, Mohammed, son 
of Balishad, has informed me, “ I saw a woman 
who was carrying a creature of human visage, 
only that its face was black like the face of the 
Zindjs, and its feet and hands were longer than 
those of a man. This animal had a long tail and 
fur like a monkey. It was sitting on the 
woman’s knees and nozzling against her. 
‘ What’s that ? ’ I asked her. ‘ An animal 
which lives in thickets and in trees ’, she 
replied. It kept up an unintelligible whimper. 
Though evidently related to the monkey, it 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


had the visage and the general conformation 
of a man.” 


EXXIV I learn from the same informant, 
that, in the island of Lameri, are camelopards 
of an indescribable bigness. They say that 
some shipwrecked men, who were obliged 
to go from the confines of Fansour towards 
Lameri, refrained from travelling at night for 
fear of camelopards. During the day there was 
no sign of these creatures ; but, as night drew 
in, the travellers took refuge in a big tree ; and, 
night being come, they heard them roaming 
round, and, by daylight, could see their traces 
in the sand. 

There is also a terrible plague of ants in these 
islands, particularly in the Island of Lameri, 
where they are of an enormous size. 


LXXV The same informant tells me, 

that he has heard tell by a sailor, that at 
Louloubilenk, which is a bay in the coast, 
dwell a cannibal tribe, and that these anthro- 
pophagi have tails. They live between Fansour 
and the land of Lameri. 

In the Island of El-Neyan, which is an island 

08 



THU MARVELS OF INDIA 


of the Outer Sea, two hundred parasangs 
distant from Fansour, are also cannibals. They 
collect human skulls and glory in the number 
they manage to accumulate. They pay a very 
high price for ingots of brass : brass, in their 
country, has the lasting and durable qualities 
of gold with us, while gold, with them, is no 
more lasting or durable than brass with us. 
Blessed be God, the Best of Creators ! 

Beyond the Island of El-Neyan, there arc 
three islands, called Bcraua, also inhabited by 
a people which cats human flesh ; they keep 
the skulls and put them to various uses. 

All the tribes, which inhabit Fansour, Lamcri, 
Kala, Qaqala, Dai'far, and other countries are 
anthropophagi, — with this difference, that they 
only eat their enemies, and that from vengeance 
and not from greed. They cut up human flesh 
into long, thin strips, which they dry and 
prepare in various ways. 


LXXJ T 1 have it from the same in- 
formant, that the inhabitants of the Ladjialous 
Islands, a numerous group of islands which 
stretch for a distance of eighty parasangs , go out 
to meet ships and barter with goods from hand 
to hand. If a piece of merchandise is left with 
them, before the exchange has been completed, 
they run off and you can never get it back. 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 

As often as a ship is wrecked upon their 
shores, and a man or woman is cast up there, 
if the shipwrecked person has managed to 
save something or other, and is holding it in 
his hand, they do not despoil him ; for it is 
their practice never to take anything from the 
hand of a person who is cast up amongst them. 
They receive the stranger in their house, make 
him sit down, give him to eat whatever they 
arc eating themselves, and do not cat, on their 
side, until their guest has satisfied his hunger. 
Thus they treat him, till such time as a ship 
puts in. Then they conduct the stranger on 
board, ask him to remunerate them and take 
what he gives. Now and again, it happens 
that a man, whom chance has thus thrown into 
their midst, finds some means of doing them a 
service and, with trifles, is able to buy amber- 
gris of them, which he stores up till a ship 
comes by. In this way, his sojourn among 
them is turned to some profit. 


LXXVII A traveller, who had pene- 
trated the land of India, once told me that, 
according to what he had heard said, the 
finest diamonds, the most beautiful and the 
most precious, are derived from the territory 
of Cashmere. There is a gorge, between two 
mountains, where burns a fire, which never 


no 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


dies down, neither by day nor by night, 
summer nor winter. And, in this gorge, are 
the diamonds. Only Indians of the baser sort 
adventure themselves in this perilous country. 
Banded together in troops, they gain the 
approaches of the gorge, and, slaughtering 
lean sheep, they cut the flesh up small and 
throw it into the gorge by means of an inven- 
tion of theirs. For several reasons, they cannot 
enter the gorge themselves. First of all, there 
is the ever-burning fire ; and, moreover, there 
is also an indescribable number of vipers and 
snakes, so many that no living thing could 
pass them and survive. 

And, as soon as they have thrown the meat in, 
there alight a horde of eagles, which seize the 
meat, whenever it falls clear of the fire, and 
carry it off. They follow the eagles’ flight. 
Sometimes, a diamond falls from the piece of 
meat which is being carried away. The eagle 
settles, here or there, to make its meal. Thither 
they go, and collect the diamonds. If the meat 
falls into the fire, it is burned. The eagle, 
which tries to snatch a bit of meat too near 
the fire, is also burned. And it occasionally 
happens, that an eagle catches a piece of meat 
while it is flying through the air, before it has 
touched the ground. 

So that is how the diamonds are collected. 
Most of those, who undertake the gathering 
of them, perish by fire or by the vipers or the 
snakes. The monarchs of those parts are great 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


lovers of diamonds, and recruit men for the 
trade. They spend much energy in getting 
them, because of the sparkle of the gems and 
the high prices they fetch. 


EXXJ ’III A traveller once told me, that 
a Chinese king showed him round a garden at 
Khanfou. “ This garden ”, he said, “ was 
twenty djeribas in extent. There 1 saw narcissi, 
anemones, roses, and a thousand other kinds 
of dower. I was amazed to see flowers of every 
season, blooming all together in the same 
garden. ‘You like it?’ he inquired. ‘I have 
never seen anything prettier or more charm- 
ing ’, I replied. ‘ All you see ’, he continued, 
‘ trees and flowers both, is made of silk ’. And 
then 1 realised that these flowers, these roses, 
were made of Chinese silk, woven, plaited, 
broidered, and worked in a myriad different 
ways, but so cunningly that, at first sight, you 
would never doubt but they were real flowers 
and trees ”. 


LXX1X At Andaman-the-Great is a 
golden temple which encloses a tomb, an 
object of great reverence to the inhabitants. 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


It was their reverence for this tomb which 
induced them to raise the golden temple over 
it. Thither go the inhabitants of the two 
islands in pilgrimage. They say that this is the 
tomb of Solomon, son of David, — God bless 
them, one and the other ! — and they add that 
the king prayed God to place his tomb in a 
spot where the men of those times could not 
go, and that God heard his prayer and put it 
in their island. To this day, in fact, no one has 
ever touched at Andaman ; no one, at least, 
has ever returned to tell the tale. But a 
comrade, who had made the voyage to the 
gold-bearing lands, once told me that, at Safir, 
he had seen a man, who said that he had 
landed at Andaman with a ship’s crew. The 
rest were all eaten, and he alone escaped ; 
and to him we owe the information given 
above. 


LXXX Many are the sailors, who have 

spoken to me about that famous pearl, 
renowned under the name of yetinia (orphan), 
because there is not another like it in the 
whole world. Here are details of its history, 
as I have heard them told. At Oman, there 
dwelt a man, called Mouslim, son of Besher, a 
person of great piety and exemplary conduct, 
whose business it was to furnish divers for the 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 

pearl fishery. Some fortune was his, but his 
affairs with the pearl divers turned out so 
badly, that he dissipated all his substance and, 
one fine day, found himself entirely without 
resources, without victuals or clothes, without 
any single object in his possession which he 
could put to account, save only a bracelet, 
worth a hundred dinars , which belonged to his 
wife. “ Give it me ”, he said, “ that I may 
employ its price fitting out a fresh gang of 
divers ; perhaps it may be, that God will send 
a piece of luck our way ”. “ Good Lord ”, his 
wife retorted, “ we have nothing left to live 
on ; we are reduced to beggary. At least, let’s 
use the money we get for this bracelet to live 
on, and not throw it away into the sea ”. 

But her husband knew how to cozen her ; 
he wheedled the bracelet from her, and took 
and sold it. The entire sum was employed in 
fitting out divers, with whom he departed to 
the fisheries. It was agreed, that they should 
fish for two months and no longer. So, for 
fifty-nine days, his men dived, collected 
oysters, opened them and found nothing. And, 
upon the sixtieth day, they dived in the Devil’s 
name, — may God damn him ! — and this time 
they brought up an oyster, which contained a 
pearl of great value, worth, perhaps, the 
amount of Mouslim’s possessions from the 
day of his birth to that very day. “ Look ”, 
exclaimed the divers, “ what we have found in 
the Devil’s name ! ” Mouslim took the pearl, 

114 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


ground it to powder, and flung it back into the 
sea. “ Well ”, the divers remarked, “ that’s 
how you behave, is it ? Here you are, without 
anything, in the last stages of poverty ; a 
magnificent pearl comes your way, one worth 
thousands of dinars , perhaps, and you grind it 
to powder ! ” “ Glory be to God ”, he 

answered them. “ Should I have done right 
to make my profit from something, got in the 
Devil’s name ? God would not bless it. It was 
to tempt me he let fall this pearl into my hands. 
If I had kept it, you would have followed my 
example, all of you, and only dived in the 
Devil’s name, — a terrible sin, for which no 
profit could make up. By the One God ! 
I could not wish all the pearls in the sea at such 
a price. Go now, dive again, and say : ‘ In the 
name of God and by his blessing ! ’ ” 

So the divers obeyed him, and dived again. 
And the sunset prayer of that same day, which 
was the last of the sixty, had not yet gone by, 
when they had laid their hands on two pearls, 
of which one was the orphan pearl and the other 
a pearl of far lesser value. Mouslim took them 
to the Caliph Rashid, and sold him the orphan 
pearl for seventy thousand dirhems, and the 
smaller for thirty thousand, and went home 
to Oman with a hundred thousand dirhems. 
There he built himself a great house, bought 
slaves, and accumulated landed property. His 
house is well known at Oman. And that is the 
story of the orphan pearl. 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


LXXXI Younis, son of Mehran, of 
Siraf, the merchant, who has visited Zabedj, 
tells me : “ In the capital city, where Mahradj, 
King of Zabedj, has his residence, I saw 
innumerable streets, given over to trade. In 
the Street of the Changers, I counted as many 
as eight hundred changers, besides those who 
are scattered here and there through the other 
streets ”. He added much else, with regard to 
this island, the buildings, and the incredible 
number of its towns and villages. 


LXXXII One of my acquaintance has 
told me the following charming story. 

“ I was on board a ship ”, he said, “ going 
from El-Aylah to Biarah, when such a 
blusterous wind got up and the sea ran so high, 
that we tore off our garments and abandoned 
any hope of safety. Now, there was with us in 
the ship a woman, who carried a little child. 
Till that moment, she had stayed very quiet ; 
but, as soon as matters began to take a serious 
turn for us, far from losing her composure, 
she fell to laughing and dancing her baby up 
and down. While we still despaired of our 
lives, was not the moment to question her. 
Once we had reached the shott and were out 
of danger again : ‘ Woman ’, said I, ‘ what 

116 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 

persuaded you to laugh and dance your baby 
when we were in mortal peril ? Weren’t you 
as much afraid of drowning as we were ? ’ ‘If 
you were to learn my story she replied, 
‘ you’d be surprised and, what’s more, you’d 
understand how it was I kept so calm and why 
the storm did not frighten me ’. ‘ Tell us your 
story ’, we cried. ‘ I am from Hl-Ayla ’, she said. 
‘ My father had a friend among the sailors, 
whose ships make the crossing from Oman to 
Basra and Basra to Oman. As often as his ship 
was coming from Oman and touched at our 
town, this friend of ours came to see us, 
brought us little presents, and stayed with us 
till his ship left ; we made him presents too, 
such as we could afford. He was a good man. 
My father gave him me in marriage. After 
three years, my father died, and “ Come ; I’ll 
take you to Oman ”, said my husband, 
“ where are my mother and my family ”. So 
I went with him to Oman, and there I stayed 
with his family the space of four years. And he 
sailed backwards and forwards between Oman 
and Basra, as usual. Then he died at Oman, 
five months after the birth of this child. When 
the period, fixed by law, was over, I grew tired 
of Oman. I had only stayed there because of 
my husband. “ I want to return to my family, 
at El-Ayla ”, I said to his mother and his 
relatives. “ If you’ll stay with us ”, they 
replied, “ we will go shares with you ; we have 
no other child but yours Thus did they 

*7 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


urge me to stay, but I refused them. Just before 
leaving, I bought the child a cradle, solidly 
made of bamboo, and I packed inside clothes 
of his and mine and certain provisions, all 
covered up and neatly arranged, and put the 
child on top. 

I embarked upon a ship, going to Basra. 
During the voyage, we were overtaken by a 
storm. In the darkness of the night, the ship 
went to pieces. Passengers and sailors were 
scattered, here and there, in the water, and no 
one could see his fellow. As for me, I kept 
afloat till the morrow midday, on a plank to 
which I clung. A passing ship sighted us. The 
captain rescued some dozen castaways from 
the water, and I was one of them. Once on 
deck, they hung us upside down, that we might 
throw off the water we had swallowed, and, 
then, gave us a cordial to drink ; and so they 
tended us till next day, and we were ourselves 
once more. I had been so much shaken by my 
experience, that the recollection of my child 
had quite slipped my head, when I heard the 
captain say : “ Find out if this woman here 
has any milk ; else, the child we rescued is 
bound to die ”. They came to me and asked 
me : “ Have you any milk ? ” It was then I 
remembered my baby. “ Yes, I had some 
milk ” I said, “ but, after what has happened 
to me, I don’t know if I have any left.” “ Well, 
take a look at the child, before it dies ”, they 
answered. And, so saying, they brought me 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


the cradle with the child in it, just as T had last 
seen it, without anything missing. I beheld, 
gave a scream, tumbled face-downwards on the 
deck, swooning. They threw water over me, 
and “ What is the matter ? ” they asked. As 
soon as I had come to myself, I sobbed and 
pressed the child to my bosom. “ What is the 
matter with you, woman ? ” repeated those 
who stood by. “ This child is my son,” I 
cried. The captain came up. “ This child 
belongs to you, does it ? ” he said. “ Very 
well ! Tell us what it has underneath it in the 
cradle ”. Whereupon, I fell to describing, 
piece by piece, all the different articles of which 
the child’s bed was composed ; and, one by 
one, they drew them forth and found every- 
thing, just as though I had put them there a 
moment before. The bystanders wept and 
praised God, and returned Him thanks. 
Having once been thus whelmed in the flood, 
torn from my child, and again miraculously 
re-united, how should I be afraid in the midst 
of the storm ? If it be God’s will that I should 
drown, what will my fears avail me ? ’ ” 


LXXXIII A merchant of Siraf told me 
the following story : “ I was going ”, he said, 
“ from Oman to Basra, and, among the other 
passengers, was a native of Mansoura, a very 

me) 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 

pretty young girl. One of the sailors, I noticed, 
made her overtures, but, since she kept her 
cabin, there was very little he could do. Near 
Harek, the aspect of the sea changed, the wind 
blew a tempest and the ship broke up. As luck 
would have it, I managed to cling onto the 
rigging. Several others had done the like, and, 
in their number, was the young girl from 
Mansoura and the sailor whose fancy she had 
taken. He at once set about her, that he might 
have his pleasure ; but she fended him off 
with kicks, delivered to such purpose that he 
kept his distance for the rest of the day. All the 
while, we were climbing and plunging at the 
caprice of the waves. At last, the girl resisted 
no more ; the sailor mastered her and had his 
way. I watched it happen ; but we were quite 
unable to shift our places, or to speak to him 
and stop him. Besides, we hardly gave it a 
thought, seeming, as we did, to be only a 
hair’s-breadth from our doom. Morning came, 
and the young girl had disappeared. Those, 
who dropped off into the sea, outnumbered 
those who saved their lives upon the rigging. 


EXXXIV At Sihour, the same informant 
told me, there dwelt a man, called Abbas, son 
of Mahan, a native of Siraf, who was hebermen 
of the Musulmans. 


*20 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


Now, a sailor, passing through Sihour, 
noticed an idol, which represented a young 
woman of great beauty. None saw him, he 
thought ; so he ran towards the idol and 
embraced it. Then, somebody or other coming 
by, the fellow took fright and ran off. The 
passer-by, who had seen what he did, laid hold 
of the sailor, hailed him before the King of 
Sihour, related the whole incident, and the 
sailor confessed his action. “ What think 
you ? ” asked the king of his people who stood 
round. “ Let him be thrown to the elephants ”, 
suggested one, “ that they may trample him 
underfoot.” “ Or hacked in pieces ”, added 
another. “ No ”, said the king, “ we must not 
do that. He is an Arab, and there are treaties 
between us and the Arabs. One of you go 
and find Abbas, son of Mahan, hebermen of the 
Musulmans, and inquire of him thus : ‘ How is 
it you punish a man, who has defiled a woman 
in a mosque ? ’ Take note of his answer and 
act accordingly.” 

So one of his vizirs went and performed the 
orders of the king. Abbas, son of Mahan, 
purposing to exalt his faith in the eyes of these 
infidels, replied : “ Under such circumstances, 
we put the man to death.” Whereupon the 
sailor was executed. Abbas, learning the 
details of the business, feared lest the king 
should forcibly detain him in the town and 
secretly fled away from Sihour. 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


LXXXV Darbezin of Siraf, brother-in- 
law to Obeid Allah, son of Ayyoub, who was 
the grandfather of Abd- Allah, son of Fadl, the 
Cadi, informed me : “I was one day at 
Khanfou, a city of Greater China, when . . . 
the people sat down all along the road which 
the chamberlain was to follow, in order to see 
the procession. The escort began to pass, in 
separate parties, at sunrise, and continued till 
asr (three hours after noon). At last, the 
chamberlain came himself. He had with him 
a hundred thousand horsemen.’' 


LXXXVI Abbas, son of Mahan, sarhin of 
Sihour, has communicated to me the following 
singular adventure, which he had from a 
merchant to whom it happened. 

This merchant had freighted a ship, for the 
voyage from Sindan or Sihour to Oman. 
Among other goods, he gave his agent a long 
plank of sadj, bearing his mark, and said to 
him : “ Do you sell this, and, with the money, 
buy me such and such an object ”, of which he 
handed him a memorandum. The ship set sail. 
“ Some two months had gone by, or longer ”, 
the merchant continued, “ when, as I was 
sitting in my house, a man came to me and said : 
‘ A long plank of wood has drifted into the 


122 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 

port and your name is inscribed on it ’. I got 
up and went to the port, full of misgivings. 
I looked, and there, sure enough, was my plank 
of sadj. Thenceforward, I was convinced that 
my ship must have been wrecked at sea. The 
plank was of an unusual length, and, doubtless, 
they would not have removed it from the hold 
and thrown it overboard, with other cargo, on 
the occasion of a storm. Thus persuaded, I 
received condolences, and, making up my 
mind to the loss of the ship and its contents, I 
went about my business as usual. I had ceased 
to cherish any hopes, and some two months had 
passed without bringing any news from sea, 
when a fellow came in and told me : ‘ Your 
ship is in sight Down I rushed to the port ; 
my ship came into harbour, and my agent 
landed and came to speak to me. I questioned 
him, and, ‘ We are safe and sound, and in good 
health ’, he replied. ‘ Haven’t you lost any- 
thing ’, I asked him, ‘ or thrown anything over- 
board ? ’ ‘ Not so much as a tooth-pick ! ’ my 
agent replied. I gave thanks to God, and 
continued : ‘ What have you done with such- 
and-such a plank of wood ? ’ I inquired. ‘ I 
sold it he said, £ at the price of thirty and 
something dinars , and laid out the money in 
purchases for you \ I was considerably sur- 
prised, hearing this. Finally, he handed me his 
accounts, which included the price of the plank. 
‘ Come ’, I admonished him, ‘ you shall tell me 
the truth about that plank of sadj \ And I 

izf 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


pressed him till he had told me the story which 
follows : ‘ We had arrived at Oman ’, he said, 
‘ and had disembarked the whole ship’s cargo 
upon the beach. A violent storm got up. The 
wood was rolled back into the sea by the waves. 
The sand was turned up and, as God willed it, 
covered such-and-such planks. Next day, I 
collected my people and we made a search for 
the lost goods. We found everything, except 
the long plank of wood. I thought that it 
might, perhaps, be hidden in the sand, and 
made them dig all along the beach, but without 
success ’ ”. And so the waves had carried it out 
to sea, and brought it home to its master. Of 
its kind, that is one of the most remarkable 
stories it has ever been my lot to hear. 


LXXXVII In the year 342, a ship, which 
belonged to a merchant of Basra, was going 
from Oman to Jeddah, when it encountered a 
violent hurricane of wind, in the vicinity of 
Shedjertan. A part of the cargo was thrown 
overboard, and, among other things, five bales 
of halidj cotton ; and thus the ship was saved. 
That same year, another ship, belonging to 
the same merchant, left Basra for Aden and 
Ghalafqa. Approaching the same neighbour- 
hood, hard by Shedjertan, a little boat, which 
was being towed behind the ship, slipped its 

124 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


cable, and was carried off by the waves. 
Several of the crew jumped into the long-boat 
to recover it. They followed it, and came up 
with it in a small bay. And there, upon the 
beach, what should they see but five bales of 
halidj cotton, which bore the master’s imprint. 
They put them aboard the long-boat, and 
regained the ship. At first, they thought 
that they had come from some wreck. But, 
later, they ascertained that these bales were 
part of the cargo thrown overboard. 


EXXXVIII I have been told, that a person, 
whose word deserved credence, related how, in 
some Indian country, he had seen two men 
adopt a curious method of suicide. Close 
together, they dug two pits, and, climbing into 
them and standing upright, they filled the 
interior with dried dung and lighted it. While 
the fire gnawed at the lower part of their 
bodies, they played a game on a draught-board, 
set between them, chewed betel, and sang 
songs, thus continuing till the fire had reached 
their hearts and they were dead. My informant 
had forgotten whether the original narrator 
had said that they died during the first day, or 
whether they survived until the morrow. 


125 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


LXXXIX Abd-el- Wahid, son of Abd-er- 

Rahman, of Fous (or Qous), who was the 
nephew of Abou-Hatim Kl-Fasoui, and who 
had a long experience of seafaring, told me 
that the Indians used to wear their hair, 
arranged upon the crown of the head like a 
mitre, and employ straight-bladed swords. 
Following a war, the victors said to the van- 
quished : “ We will not spare you unless you 
wear your hair smoothed down and carry 
curved sabres like us For the victorious 
tribe had smooth hair and employed curved 
sabres, called qaratil. And the custom con- 
tinues to this day among those tribes. 


XC Ali, son of Mohammed, son of 

Sahl, who was known under the name of 
Serouber and who had visited Tana and . . . 
once told me that houses there are built upon 
the edge of the water. The inhabitants, all of 
them, great and small, are afflicted with night- 
blindness, because they eat too much ’ alim , 
that is to say, the male of the marine turtle. 
Everybody has a rope, tied to his house-door 
and leading down to the water, where it is 
attached to a stake. Their blindness comes on 
at the approach of sunset. From that moment, 
whichever of them would relieve some natural 

126 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


urgency must, perforce, take hold of the rope, 
go down to the water, purge himself there and 
return in the like manner. And thus it is till 
the morrow and broad daylight, and the sun is 
already high. Now and again, a silly practical- 
joker, happening on their country, will amuse 
himself by detaching the rope from one door- 
way and tying it to another. The blind man 
goes down to the water and comes back, to 
find strangers in possession. Then they lose 
their tempers and start a quarrel : “ What are 
you doing in my house ? ” 


XCI A person, named Abou Taher, 

of Bagdad, related how he had made the voyage 
to Zabedj, and said that, among the townships 
of the Isle of Zabedj, is one called Merqavend, 
where ambergris abounds. . . . The natives, 
who do not know its value, sell it very cheap. 
And Abou Thaer himself had a certain amount 
of it, which he took aboard the ship, without 
the captain’s knowledge. 


XCII Yezid of Oman, captain of one 

of the ships which make the voyage to the land 
of the Zindjs, said to me : “ In that country. 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


I saw two great mountains, and a defile between 
them, which bears the traces of fire and is 
strewn with calcined bones and charred hides. 
When I made inquiries, they told me that, at 
certain periods, this valley is swept by a fire. 
If there are any sheep or other beasts pasturing 
in the defile, or if there are shepherds, who let 
themselves be surprised by the fire, they are 
burned up, one and all. This fire happens on 
certain days, and comes running along the 
ground like a torrent ”. 


XCIII In the countries of India, there 

are bands of robbers, who go from town to 
town, attacking merchants, natives as well as 
foreigners. These brigands fall upon their man, 
in his house, on the road, or even in the open 
market-place. They set a knife at his throat, 
exclaiming : “ Give us such-and-such, or you 
are a dead man ”. And, should anyone run up 
to their victim’s assistance, they slay him, 
though he be a king, but are also prepared to 
kill themselves, if escape becomes impossible. 
So, when they make an onslaught, nobody 
dares resist them or say a word, for fear of 
death. And the man, whom they have laid 
hands on, follows them and stops just where 
they please, in the market-place or in his own 
house, in his shop or in his garden, and collects 

128 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


the sum of money and the goods they demand. 
Meanwhile, they eat and drink, but always 
with unsheathed knives in their hands. Then 
their unlucky victim is obliged to lend them 
the services of a man, who carries his ransom 
and goes along in their company as far as their 
lodging, where they are out of danger. There 
they take the ransom, money and goods, and 
turn the porter loose. 


XCIV Mohammed, son of Mouslim, 

of Siraf, who had lived more than twenty years 
at Tana, and had travelled in most Indian 
countries and was excellently well-informed 
with regard to the manners and usages of the 
inhabitants, told me how, one day, twelve 
bandits came to Dhimour and Tana, and laid 
hold of an Indian merchant, whose father was 
a very rich man and very much attached to this 
son, his only child. They took him in his 
house and demanded some ten thousand 
dinars , a sum, comprising only a fraction of the 
father’s wealth. Whereupon, the merchant 
sent his father a messenger, warning him what 
had occurred and begging he would ransom 
him and thus save his life. His father sought 
out the brigands, talked with them, and sug- 
gested that they should reduce their demand to 
a thousand dinars. But they would not hear 
k 129 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


him, and insisted that he gave them the entire 
amount. 

Understanding them to be so resolved, the 
merchant went to the king, explained the whole 
business, and remarked : “ This is an intoler- 
able state of affairs. If those bandits aren’t 
taught a lesson, life will become impossible in 
your country ”. “ What can we do ? ” asked 
the king. “ It is easy enough for me to get to 
grips with them ; but, if we set about them, 
they will put your son to death ; and he is 
your only child ”. “ Yes, worse luck ! ” 

answered the merchant, “ but they are asking 
an exorbitant ransom. I can’t reduce my- 
self to poverty, just to save my son. What 
you must do, is to pile wood round the house, 
barricade the door, and then set fire to it ”. 
“ But your son will burn with the rest of 
the people inside ”, the king protested. “ Let 
them burn ! ” retorted the merchant. “ I’d 
rather it came to that, than lose so much 
money ”. 

So, the king sent his men, to barricade the 
doorway and fire the house. It was burnt to 
the ground, and, with it, the brigands, the 
merchant’s son, and all that was inside. 

They say that, in Upper India, the custom 
still prevails of burning the old people, women 
as well as men. 


130 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


XCV At the court of the kings of 

Zabedj and the gold-bearing countries, it was 
formerly the custom that no man should sit 
down in their presence, except squatting in the 
position named St la, whether he were native, 
foreigner, or Musulman. Whoever permitted 
himself the liberty of stretching out his legs, or 
of sitting down after any other fashion, was 
punished by a considerable fine, assessed 
according to his fortune. 

Well, it happened that a sailor, called Djehoud 
Koutah, a man held in general esteem, was 
received by one of these monarchs, whose name 
was Bidbana-Kala. The sailor was heavy with 
years. He sat down before the king, adopting 
the required position. But the business he had 
come about dragged on and the king delayed 
giving his decision ; and so it continued, till 
the old man changed the subject and began to 
speak of something else. “ We have at Oman ”, 
he remarked, a fish, called Kanad , which is so 
long And, thus saying, he stretched out his 
leg and marked it off at the middle of his thigh. 
“ There are others ”, he proceeded, “ as long 
as that ”. And he stretched out his other leg, 
with one hand touching the middle of his body. 
Said the king to his vizir : “ The fellow must 
have some reason for speaking to us about 
fishes, when we were discussing quite another 
subject. What think you ? ” “ My lord ”, 

replied the vizir, “ he is an old man, stricken in 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


years and weak. He is unable to maintain the 
prescribed position till the end of the audience. 
His weariness has got the better of him, and 
he has hit on this way of relieving it ”. Whereat 
the king said : “ It is proper that the custom 
should be dispensed with, as far as foreigners, 
who are also Musulmans, are concerned ”. So, 
for them, he had it abolished. And, ever since, 
Musulmans sit down before the kings of 
Zabedj at their own convenience. But the rest 
are obliged to continue sitting, in the position, 
named Si/a, under pain of the fine described 
above. 


XCVI There are in India devotees and 

religious persons of many kinds, among them 
being the Bikour, a sect originally coming from 
Serendib, who take kindly to Musulmans and 
show them much sympathy. In summer, they 
go about, scantily clothed, with bare feet, only 
covering their nakedness with some rag or 
other, which is, now and then, a mere scrap of 
stuff, four fingers broad, tied to the girdle by a 
string and thence falling over their secret parts. 
In winter, they clothe themselves with grass. 
Some of them wear an i^ar, made up of a 
patchwork of bits and pieces of every colour. 
They smear their bodies with the ashes of dead 
Indians’ bones. They shave their heads, pluck 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


out their beards and moustaches, but keep 
their pubic hair and the hair of their arm- 
pits. They cut and chew their nails. Each 
of them has the upper part of a dead man’s 
skull, by way of porringer, from which he 
eats and drinks, to mortify himself and as a 
mark of humility. 

When the news of the Prophet’s coming — on 
whom be the salvation and the blessing of 
God ! — reached the people and the rulers of 
Serendib, they dispatched one of their number 
to search him out and inquire the subject of 
his teaching ; the messenger, after going from 
city to city, at length arrived at Medina, when 
the Prophet was already dead, as well as Abou- 
Bekr. The chief of the Musulmans was then 
Omar, son of El-Khattab, who gave the 
messenger all the necessary instruction. But, 
returning homewards, he died on the road, 
in the neighbourhood of Mekran. An Indian 
serving-man, however, who had accompanied 
him, was able to gain Serendib and thither 
carry the knowledge he had acquired, touching 
the Prophet and Abou-Bekr. And he described 
what he had seen of their successor, Omar, 
son of El-Khattab, his humility, the patched 
garments he wore, and his nightly vigils in the 
mosques. It was in accordance with the report 
of this young man, that religious persons 
among the Indians adopted their habits of 
self-abasement and of wearing patchwork gar- 
ments, just as Omar did. Thence also come 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


the kindness and sympathy which they show 
to Musulmans. 

By the religion of the Indians, wine is for- 
bidden to men but allowed to women. There 
are some Indians who are secret drinkers. 


ATT! 77 India has her magicians and 

augurs, whose practices are well known. I have 
already made some mention of them. 

Abou-Youssef, son of Mouslim, informs me 
that Abou-Bekr El-Fasoui told him, that he 
had heard Moussa, of Sindabour, relate the 
following story : “ One day ”, he said, “ I was 
in conversation with the Sahib of Sindabour, 
when the Sahib suddenly burst out laughing. 
‘ Do you know why I was laughing ? ’ he 
inquired. ‘ No ’, 1 answered him. ‘ I was 
laughing ’, he continued, ‘ because there are 
two lizards upon the wall, and one of them has 
just said to the other : “ Here comes a stranger 
as our guest ” ’. His folly astonished me, and, 
soon afterwards, I thought to leave him. But 
‘ Do not go, till you have seen the conclusion 
of the affair he urged me. And thus we 
stayed talking, and presently a servant entered 
and said : 4 A ship from Oman has come into 
the port ’. Some little time later, there arrived 
porters, carrying baskets, which contained 
divers goods, fabrics, and rose-water. While a 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


basket was being opened, of those which con- 
tained rose-water, what should run out but a 
big lizard. Under my very eyes, it joined the 
other two upon the wall 


XC VIII It was an adept in these same 

magical arts, who laid a spell upon the 
crocodiles in the port of Serira, where, since 
that day, they have done no one any harm. 
Formerly, you could not go near the water 
without getting from them some grievous 
hurt. They teemed there, in an incredible 
number. But an Indian came by, who said to 
the King of Serira : “ If you will, I can cast 
such a spell upon the crocodiles that, hence- 
forth, they shall touch no one in the port ”. 
“ Do so ”, answered the king, “ and your 
reward shall be such-and-such ”. Then the 
fellow disappeared, and could not be found 
again. 

Some while later, another Indian, versed in 
magic and in divinatory science, came and 
established himself at Serira. He made a friend 
and one day said to him : “ I should like to 
show you something curious ”. “ Very well ”, 
replied his friend. So the Indian sat down at 
the edge of the water, pronounced certain 
words, and then remarked to his companion : 
“ You can go into the water now, without fear 

i?5 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 

of crocodiles. Or, if you would rather, get 
someone else to go in ; or 1 will go in myself 
“ Go in yourself ”, said his friend. Whereupon, 
he did, in fact, enter the water and was 
presently followed by his companion. Round 
them swam the crocodiles, but did them not 
the least hurt. They emerged, and “ Shall I 
remove the spell ? ” the magician asked. “ Do 
so ”, said the other ; a dog was thrown in, 
and, in an instant, the crocodiles had rent it to 
bits. 

The report of the Indian’s magic power came 
to the ears of the king, who sent for him and 
demanded : “ Are you really able to do such- 
and-such a thing ”. “ Assuredly ”, he replied. 
Straightway, the king leapt on horseback, and 
reached the port. With him he had taken two 
men, whose death he wished to compass. 
“ Come, perform ! ” he exclaimed. The Indian 
pronounced his spell upon the water ; one of 
the two men was pushed in, and the crocodiles 
swam round but showed no sign of attacking 
him. “ Disenchant them,” the king com- 
manded. The magician pronounced a new 
form of words, and the crocodiles tore him in 
pieces. “ Well done ”, said the king. “ You 
deserve your reward ”, giving him a round sum 
of money, investing him in a garment of 
honour, and lavishing on him, besides, promises 
of future bounty. 

Next day, the king said to the magician : “ I 
wish to see you do what you did yesterday, all 

1*6 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


over again ”. “ Very good ”, he replied. Then 
the king called one of his servants, a man of 
unequalled strength and hardihood. “ As soon 
as I make you a sign ”, he commanded him, 
“ strike off this enchanter’s head, and without 
a moment’s delay They went down to the 
port. The Indian performed his rite. The 
second prisoner, condemned to death, was 
thrust in. The crocodiles did not touch him ; 
they constrained him to traverse the port from 
side to side, and, though surrounded by croco- 
diles, he got from them not so much as a 
scratch. When the king was assured that the 
enchantment comprehended the whole port, he 
gave his slave the agreed sign, and, there and 
then, the slave lopped off the enchanter’s head ; 
since which day the crocodiles in the port of 
Serira arc absolutely harmless. 


XCIX Theft, among the Indians, is a 

very serious offence. If the thief is of Indian 
descent and is some poor wretch without 
fortune, then the king condemns him to death. 
If, on the other hand, he is a person of 
substance, the king takes away all that he has 
or imposes a heavy fine. And thus it is, 
when a man knowingly acts the receiver. In 
general, death is the penalty of thieving among 
them. 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


If the thief is a Musulman, he is judged by the 
hebermen of the Musulmans, who pronounces 
sentence according to the laws of Islam. The 
hebermen takes the place of the Cadi in a Musul- 
man country ; he can only be chosen from 
those who have made a profession of Islam. 


C Raced El-Ghoulam, son of 

Balishad, has informed me : “ During a 

crossing I made from Siraf to Basra, on board 
a fine craft, in the month of Dhou’l-qada of the 
year 305, a tempest struck us nearby Ras-el- 
Kamila. We threw out a part of the cargo. 
The waves ran so high that they darkened the 
ship overhead, then broke beneath it. Many 
was the time I looked up towards the sky, but 
never had sight of it ; for the waves quite 
shut it out. They hid the light of day from 
us, and, some long time, we were in a sort of 
twilight. 


Cl The same informant has told 

me, that in India, in Sind and other countries, 
the most distinguished merchants and women 
of the highest position, though, it might be, 

•438 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


the favourite of the king herself, gather the 
dung of kinc and buffaloes. If there is someone 
at hand, to take it away, they do so ; and, if not, 
they leave their mark upon it, until such time 
as they can send and claim it. 

The Indians eat the flesh of dead beasts (of 
which the throats have not been cut), that is to 
say that the animal is clubbed on the head, 
whether it be sheep, bird, or whatever else, till 
the life has departed ; then they use it for their 
food. 

It is reported that a great man among them, at 
Dhimour and Soubada, passing a dead rat, 
picked it up and gave it to his son or his 
servant, who carried it home and ate it ; with 
them, the rat is numbered among the animals 
which they eat. 


CII 1 have already imparted several 

interesting pieces of information, to do with 
the Dhibadjat-ed-doum , a group of islands, of 
which the first is in the neighbourhood of the 
Dhibadjat-el-kastedj and the last near the Isles 
of Waqwaq. These Dhibadjat number some 
thirty thousand, twelve thousand of them 
being inhabited, as merchants tell. Their 
length varies from half a parasang to ten ; 
there is the distance of a parasang between 
them. And they are all of them sandy. 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


CIII Somebody once told me that, 

in a city of India, he had seen an elephant, 
which had been trained to run its master’s 
errands. The creature was given a bag, wherein 
they put the n>ada or ready money, together 
with a memorandum of the articles on which 
this sum was to be spent. He would go to the 
greengrocer’s. And the greengrocer, as soon 
as he saw the elephant coming, put aside any 
other business he might have on hand, left his 
other customers, and, taking the elephant’s 
bag, counted the money he found therein and 
examined the memorandum, providing it 
with the best of everything it wanted, and the 
cheapest as well. Now and again, the shop- 
keeper would make an error of calculation, 
while he was counting out the money, and the 
elephant would straightway mix up the coins 
with its trunk, so that he was obliged to start 
counting afresh. Finally, the elephant used 
to go off with its purchases, and, getting home, 
did its master find that it had been badly served, 
he beat it, and the elephant would rush back to 
the greengrocer’s shop, and turn it topsy- 
turvy. And thus it did, whether it had been 
given more than it deserved, or less than the 
money required. 

That same elephant swept, watered and poun- 
ded rice, with a pestle it held in its trunk. It 
drew water from the well, by means of a bucket 
on a rope. In fact, it did every kind of work. 

*<40 



THE ALAR EELS OF INDIA 


Whenever he had some long excursion to 
make, its master rode it. A little boy also rode 
it, out into the fields. The elephant rooted up 
grass and tore down leaves with its trunk. 
Assisted by the child, it stuffed leaves and 
grass into a bag, and took them home for its 
provender. 

Thus trained, an elephant will fetch very high 
prices, as much as ten thousand dirhems , so 
they say. 


CIV Among adventures at sea which 

have been somewhat bruited about, here is the 
story told me by a merchant : 

“ I sailed from Siraf ”, he informed me, “ in 
the year 306, upon a ship which was going to 
Dhimour. We were accompanied by a ship, 
belonging to Abd- Allah, son of Djanid, and 
another which came from Seba. These three 
vessels were, all of them, large craft and well 
known at sea ; their captains also enjoyed a 
considerable reputation in the world of sailors. 
The passengers they carried, merchants, pilots, 
crew, and others, numbered twelve hundred 
souls. Their cargo, in provisions and merchan- 
dise, was of an incalculable value. After eleven 
days’ sailing, we came within sight of the 
eminences of the coast of Sendan, Tana, and 
Dhimour. Never before, it was generally said, 

14* 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 

had die voyage been accomplished in so short 
a space of time. We were in high spirits and 
congratulated one another on such a fortunate 
crossing. We were out of any danger, we 
thought, and would touch land during the 
morrow morning ; our sails were unfurled ; 
when a sudden squall got up, accompanied 
with lightning, thunder, and rain. ‘ Best 
throw the cargo overboard ’, advised the 
pilots and sailors. But (the captain of the 
vessel), Ahmed, opposed this suggestion. 
‘ Nothing shall be thrown overboard ’, he 
declared, * till I have given up all hope and I 
am quite sure that our doom is imminent ’. 
Men went down to bale out the water from 
both sides of the hold. The two ships, accom- 
panying us, were in the same plight, and 
waited their captains’ decision, to throw the 
cargo overboard or retain it. At daybreak, the 
merchants approached Ahmed : ‘ Make up 

your mind ’, they urged, ‘ to sacrifice the cargo. 
It will be no fault of yours. Here we are at the 
point of death ’. ‘ I will do nothing of the sort ’, 
he replied. And so it continued, for five days, 
our condition growing no worse. But, on the 
sixth day, Ahmed, realising that the ship was 
about to founder, finally commanded that it 
be lightened. By that time, to throw anything 
overboard was no longer in our power, the 
rain having increased the weight of sacks and 
bales, and what had previously weighed five 
hundred mens now weighing as much as 

Ilj.2 



THE MARI 'ELS OF INDIA 


fifteen hundred. Our danger was pressing, and 
we launched the long-boat, some thirty-three 
men entering it. Ahmed was begged to come 
too, but he answered : * I won’t leave the 
ship. The ship has a better chance than the 
long-boat. If it sinks, I shall sink with it. 
What care I for safety, when my living has 
gone ! ’ ” 

The merchant, who told me the story, was 
among those who got aboard the long-boat. 
“ There we passed five days ”, he told me, 
“ foodless and waterless. Hunger and thirst 
and every other kind of suffering so weakened 
us that we even lost the faculty of speech. 
With signs, we began to debate whether wc 
should not be well-advised to eat one of our 
number. In the long-boat was a little boy, 
good-looking, still a child, whose father had 
stayed on the ship. It was him we resolved 
to eat. He understood what we meant, and 
I noticed how he looked up at the sky, his 
lips and eyes quietly moving. Happily, that 
very same hour, we sighted land, and soon 
could distinguish it clearly. The long-boat 
was borne ashore, touched land, split, and 
filled with water. We had not the strength 
to move nor rise. A couple of men came 
running down the beach to us. ‘ Where do 
you come from ? ’ they demanded. ‘ From 
such-and-such a ship ’, we replied. ‘ Give us a 
hand and pull us ashore ’. And, when they had 
done as we asked them and we had got ashore. 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


more dead than alive, one of the two men went 
off. ‘ Where are we ? ’ I asked his fellow. 
‘ The smoke you see over there he said, 
‘ comes from the mainland. My companion 
has gone to the village. You’ll find there food, 
water, and clothing And thither we were 
presently taken. As for those who had stayed 
on the three ships, not a soul of them all was 
saved, but only those who had put out in the 
long-boat.” 


CV A truly astounding piece of 

information is that communicated to me by a 
sailor who had spent long years in India, and 
to whom, in his turn, it had been imparted by 
many travellers who had penetrated the centre 
of the country : as how, in the territory of 
High Cashmere, there is a place, called Terna- 
rayin, where are shadowy gardens, watered by 
running streams, and where the Djinns hold 
their market. You can hear the sound of their 
voices, buying and selling, but their persons 
you cannot see. And thus it has gone on, 
since an immemorial age. “ Do you know 
if the market is permanent ”, I asked the 
sailor, “ or whether it only takes place at 
certain times ? ” “ That I did not inquire ”, 

he replied. 


*44 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


CVI A man, who had been in China, 

once told me how, in that country, he had seen 
a stone, which attracted lead through the sides 
of a vase, and which, if it was put beneath a 
pregnant woman, helped her to an easy 
delivery. There is also a stone which attracts 
copper and another which attracts gold, just 
as the lode-stone attracts iron. Finally, there is 
a stone which extinguishes fire, and within 
which is a smaller stone moving about. 

And he likewise informed me how, in the 
neighbourhood of the gobbs of Serendib, he 
had seen a stone, that, when it was broken, 
yielded a worm which crawled out to the 
extent of ten ells and then died. Upon its head 
and tail it had a kind of down, like the down 
on a young bird. 


CVII Among other marvels is a 

mountain of the Yemen, from the peak of which 
water flows drop by drop, and, congealing as it 
touches the ground, forms the Yemenese alum. 


CVIII According to an eve-witness, 

the trees of Lebanon, which are cedars, grow 
l 144 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


in ravines and in places where there is running 
water. They have no seed, and their girth has 
shown no change since the beginning of their 
existence. The people, to whom they belong, 
have always known them the same, and always 
in full beauty. They are only found in the 
region, betwixt the frontiers of Hasil and the 
frontiers of Haridj, a territory covering some 
fifty to a hundred parasangs. 


CIX Somebody, who had travelled 

in India, once told me that he had seen, at 
Atakia, not far from Mankir, a city of the gold- 
bearing countries, a big tree, thick-boled, and 
much like a walnut, which bore red roses (or 
leaves), whereon you read, written in white 
characters : “ There is no God but God, and 
Mohammed is his Prophet ”. 


CX In the Sea of Senf is an island, 

where the crabs, which touch it, become 
stones. This stone it is, known at Aleppo, 
Iraq and, generally, that is used in the com- 
position of collyrium, for the film of the eyes. 
Fishermen call such crabs “ river-crabs ”. 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


CXI I have been told that at . . . 

there is a much venerated fountain, covered by 
a huge emerald stone, supported by four 
golden idols. When the sun rises above the 
stone, the water of the fountain becomes all 
green. 

A monarch of the vicinity, called Abar, made 
an inroad into this country, with the object of 
possessing himself of the stone. But the 
natives of the place are invincible, and, though 
they have suffered several attacks, they have 
always maintained their independence. One of 
their kings wished to take the stone also. But 
there appeared before him a negro who drove 
him off, or something in that sort. 


CXII According to one of my ac- 

quaintance, in the region of the gobbs of 
Serendib, there is a bird which hatches out its 
young on the sea-shore ; whereupon, the 
winds cease to blow during a period of forty 
days. 


CXII I “ At Beriyin (?), a city of 

India ”, Mohammed of Oman has informed 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


me, “ I saw a young Indian, apprehended for 
theft or for some other crime. The king had 
ordered that he should be flayed alive, and, 
while the operation was in progress, the 
young man talked, sang, and gave no sign of 
emotion, till the moment when his navel was 
reached. As soon as that had been cut away, 
incontinently he expired.” 


CXI I ' 1 have it from the same infor- 

mant, that, in one of the Isles of Waqwaq, 
there is a bird, like the green woodpecker, its 
plumage being speckled with red, white, green, 
and blue. It is called the semendel. It can enter 
into the fire and come out scatheless, and it can 
go a long while, eating nothing but earth. 
When it is nesting, it does not drink till the 
eggs have hatched. And, as soon as its young 
have emerged, it deserts them for a certain 
space of time, and keeps away from its brood. 
Flies and gnats buzz round them. But, when 
they are fledged and begin to run about, then 
it gives proof of its maternal devotion. 

In these Isles of Waqwaq, there is also a 
creature, like a hare, which changes its sex, and 
is now male and now female. At least, that is the 
account given of it by the people of Serendib, 
according to my informant’s story, who, in his 
turn, had it from an Indian. For my own part, 

1*48 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


I know not what to say. Similarly, they pretend 
that the hare itself changes its sex ; which, to 
my thinking, is a mere fantasy, with no founda- 
tion in fact. God alone knows the truth of 
the matter. 


CXV An informant, who had scoured 

the seas, once told me that he had seen, at 
Sofala of the Zindjs, a beast proportioned like 
the lizard and much like it both in colour and 
in shape. The male is doubly male and the 
female doubly female. Their bite cannot be 
cured ; the wound they inflict continues open 
and never heals up. This creature particularly 
frequents the plantations of sugar-cane and 
dourah. 

But it is with serpents and vipers that this 
country swarms. And a passer-by is some- 
times attacked by as many as three or four at 
the same time, which rend him in pieces. 
Does he drive off one of them, two return in 
its place. 


CXVI Djafar, son of Rashid, who 

went, under the name of Ibn-Lakis, a well- 
known sailor, to the gold-bearing countries. 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


has informed me that, once upon a time, a 
serpent, coming into the Bay of Dhimour, 
swallowed there an enormous crocodile ; at 
which news, the Sahib of Dhimour dispatched 
a company of men to capture the serpent, and 
three thousand tried warriors banded together 
against the monster, and, at length, prevailing 
against it, tied a rope round its neck. Serpent- 
catchers arrived, drew its teeth, and then chained 
it up. It had a wound, on its head, about the 
ears. It was measured, and found to be forty 
cubits long. They carried it home across their 
necks ; it weighed thousands of pounds. And 
this happened in the year 340. 


CXVII A traveller, who had made his 

way among the inhabitants of Waqwaq, once 
described to me the bigness of their towns and 
islands. By the word “ bigness ”, I do not 
mean that their towns are of vast extent, but 
that they are thickly populated. The Waq- 
waqians have a certain affinity with the Turks. 
They are most industrious artisans, while, as 
for their morals, they are treacherous, crafty, 
and deceitful, the lowest and most ill-inten- 
tioned set of people you could find anywhere. 

Ibn-Lakis has imparted to me some extra- 
ordinary pieces of information concerning 
them. . . . An attack was made on them once 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


with a fleet of a thousand ships. That was in 
the year 334. The battle was sharp, but it was 
impossible to prevail against them. . . . Ibn- 
Lakis also said that the Isles of Waqwaq were 
opposite China. 


CXVIII Serira is situated at the ex- 
tremity of the Island of Lameri, one hundred 
and twenty % ama from Kala. The estuary of 
Serira, so they say, runs fifty parasangs inland. 
It is a river of greater breadth than the Tigris 
at Basra, with a stream of sweet water equally 
large. In the whole island, there is no longer 
estuary. The tide is felt every twelve hours. 
The water contains crocodiles ; but they are 
harmless near the dwelling-places of men ; for 
they were bewitched as we have related above ; 
while, into those parts of the river, remote 
from human habitation, they make it quite 
impossible to venture. Some of the houses are 
built on dry land, but most of them float upon 
the water, and are supported by beams of 
wood, lashed together in collar shape, which 
will last for an indefinite period. Thus the 
inhabitants do from their apprehension of 
fires, since their wooden-built houses are 
particularly liable to catch fire, and, once a fire 
starts, there is no stopping it. But, on the 
water, they are better protected ; if a fire breaks 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


out anywhere, each householder can cut his 
moorings, move house, and take up other 
quarters, far from the scene of the conflagra- 
tion. And, supposing a householder tires of his 
locality, he can change the neighbourhood of 
his residence in the same fashion. These houses 
are marshalled in the bay like ships, and the 
water which surrounds them is very cool, and 
fresh too, coming as it does from the hills and 
flowing down into the estuary, towards the 
sea, in like manner with the Tigris. 

I am told by the same informant, that he had 
heard say by a ship’s-captain how vessels, 
which have started out for Sofala of the Zindjs, 
often land on a coast, where dwell cannibal 
negroes. It happens by accident, winds and 
currents diverting the vessel from its course 
and drawing it this way, in spite of all that the 
captain can do. The cannibal tribe are some 
fifteen hundred parasatigs distant from Qabila. 
God’s wisdom is over all ! As for the place, at 
which the ships touch, it is a thousand, or, by 
the very lowest estimate, eight hundred para- 
sangs beyond Qabila, and a voyage of about 
forty-two %ama. 


CXTX Ibn-Lakis has related to me 

how, happening to be at Sofala with one of the 
kings of the Zindjs, in ran a fellow, who said 

IJ2 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


to the king : “ Such-and-such a bird ” — Ibn- 
Lakis had forgotten its name — “ has alighted 
in such a wood, captured and torn to pieces 
an elephant, and was making a meal of it when 
it was taken Whereupon, the King of the 
Zindjs rose and hurried off to the wood among 
a throng of his people, said Ibn-Lakis, and I 
went with them. We arrived, and there the 
bird was struggling upon the ground, and 
there lay the carcase of the elephant, of which 
it had eaten a quarter. The king gave orders 
that the bird’s wing plumage should be 
plucked ; it had twelve large feathers, six to 
each wing. Others were secured, as well as the 
beak and a part of its talons, and a small piece 
of the creature’s entrail. The quill of one of 
these feathers contained two skinfuls of water. 
They said that it was a bird of the country, 
which, as it was passing over the wood, had 
caught sight of the elephant, seized it in its 
claws, carried it up into the air, dropped it 
again, and swooped down to devour it. Some 
people, who happened to be in the vicinity, 
had attacked it with a flight of poisoned 
arrows, and had thus overcome and slain it. 


CXX Between Thabia and the Island 

of Ghilemi is a little sea, called the Sea of 
Saifou, which it takes six days to cross. All 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


ships, which cross it, must keep to thirty 
fathoms of water ; for, if a ship gets into 
water of twenty fathoms, there is it whelmed, 
the bottom being of a fine mud, which is the 
destruction of ships that touch it ; seldom does 
a ship escape. 


CXXI Among remarkable islands, in 

all the sea there is none like the Island of 
Serendib, also called Sehilan (Ceylon). It is an 
hundred parasangs long, and the circumference 
is three hundred parasangs. There they fish 
pearls of fine water, but little ; big pearls, 
when they happen upon them, are of inferior 
quality. And there is a mountain, called Hasin, 
a mountain of jargoon and diamonds. And 
there it was, so they say, that Adam stepped 
down, and you can view his footprint, which 
is seventy cubits long. The inhabitants are they 
who declare that this is Adam’s footprint, and 
that the blessed patriarch set one foot on that 
spot and the other in the sea. In the same 
island is found a red earth, which is the 
senadidj, used for polishing rock-crystal and 
glass. Its trees yield excellent cinnamon bark, 
the famous Singalese cinnamon. The grass is 
red, and employed in dyeing stuffs and cotton 
thread ; it makes a better dye than that of 
baqqam, saffron, safflower, or any other kind 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


of red dye. And the island bears many another 
remarkable plant, which it would take too long 
to catalogue. They aver that the Island of 
Serendib contains some hundred thousand 
townships. 


CXXII I have been told that a man of 

Basra (who lived half-way down Qoreish 
Street) related . . . how, setting out from 
Basra for Zabedj or some neighbouring 
locality . . . (and the vessel on which he 
travelled suffering shipwreck), he alone 
managed to escape and was cast ashore upon 
an island. “ I walked into the island ”, he said, 
“ and, climbing a tree, there spent the night, 
hidden among the leaves. Next morning, I saw 
approach a flock of some two hundred sheep, 
big as calves, herded by a monstrous-looking 
fellow, huge, towering, and robust, hideous in 
face, carrying a stick, with which he drove them. 
He sat down on the shore, while the sheep went 
pasturing under the trees. Face-downwards 
he lolled, and slept till about midday. Then 
up he got, entered the water, and presently 
emerged. He was stark-naked and only wore 
a leaf, much like the leaf of the banana-tree, 
tied at his middle. Catching hold of an ewe 
by the leg, he took her dug in his mouth and 
sucked her and drained the udder. Thus he 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 

did with several other ewes, and thereupon 
stretched his length in the shade of a tree. And, 
as he lay, his eyes upon the branches, a bird 
chanced to light upon the very tree which was 
my hiding-place. Seizing a great stone, he flung 
it at the bird, and his aim was sure. From 
branch to branch, the bird tumbled, lodging 
just near me. The shepherd saw me and 
beckoned I should descend. Weak with terror, 
I obeyed him, though, what with fright and 
lack of food, I was half-dead. He picked up the 
bird and dashed it against the ground. The 
bird, I reckoned, might weigh as much as a 
hundred pounds. Alive he plucked it, and with 
a stone of twenty pounds weight beat in its 
head and killed it. He redoubled his strength 
and, by dint of continued blows, had ground it 
to shreds, then rent it with his teeth, like some 
carnivorous beast which devours its prey. He 
finished the last morsel and only left the bones. 
But the sun grew fainter, and he rose, grasped 
his stick, and, starting a fearful hullabaloo, 
signed to me to get up, while he made as if to 
drive off his flock. When the sheep had been 
driven together, he led them to a pool of sweet 
water which was in the island. They slaked 
their thirst. He drank, and I drank also in my 
turn, but not without reflecting that my death 
was, no doubt, close at hand. Again he set 
forth, driving the sheep before him, as far as a 
kind of paddock, made of the wattled trunks of 
trees and shut with some manner of door. 

156 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 

I entered with the flock. In the middle was a 
sort of cabin, solidly built of wooden beams, 
like a weaver’s hut, twenty cubits high. Then, 
first of all, he lay hands upon an ewe, of the 
littlest and most lean, and knocked in her skull 
with a stone. He kindled a fire, and, tearing up 
the goat’s flesh like some ferocious beast, with 
teeth and nails, flung the joints into the fire, 
still crude with shreds of hair and hide. The 
entrails he wolfed down raw. And, afterwards, 
going from ewe to ewe, he drained their milk, 
and presently, grasping the biggest round the 
middle, he used it for his sport ; when, the ewe 
bleating, he seized another, and did the same. 
Finally, he reached something from above his 
head, drank, and fell asleep, snoring like a bull. 

In the middle of the night, I began creeping 
stealthily towards the hearth, and there picked 
up the scraps of meat, to keep a last gasp of 
breath in my body. I was afraid I should rouse 
the flock, and so, waking the shepherd, be 
treated as I had watched him treat the bird and 
the sheep. I stayed stretched on the ground 
till daybreak. In the morning he left his bed, 
and drove out the flock before him, and me too 
among them. He addressed me in a tongue I 
could not understand. I answered him in the 
various languages I knew, but none of them 
did he comprehend. I am a hairy man, and it 
was seeing this, I suppose, which turned his 
stomach, and made him delay eating me. 
Fourteen days, I lived a life which never 

H7 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


changed. Not a day went by, but he caught a 
bird or two, and, if his hunger was not quite 
appeased, he slaughtered a sheep as well. I 
helped him gather wood and kindle the fire. 
Thus two months passed, and, my looks 
improving, he was pleased, I saw, and I 
realised that he was finally resolved on eating 
me. I had noticed that he culled the fruit of 
certain trees which grew in the island ; he 
steeped them in water, strained the liquor, 
swallowed it, and continued blind drunk all 
night. I had also noticed in the island birds of 
the bigness of elephants and buffaloes, some 
bigger and some smaller. It happened, now 
and again, that they devoured one of the sheep, 
and it was for this reason he and his flock spent 
the night in the paddock. And, as the paddock 
was situated in the shadow of great trees, the 
shepherd had fashioned himself a kind of 
stable there, as closely thatched as possible, and 
the birds did not venture down, fearing they 
might be caught in the branches of the trees. 

One day, I waited till he had fallen asleep 
drunk, and, with the help of a tree-branch, T 
left the paddock and walked straight in front 
of me, towards a plain I had had sight of from 
the summit of the tree. Only when morning 
came did I pause, and then fear constrained me 
to climb another tree of mighty girth. I had 
armed myself with a bludgeon, which I 
intended to use on him, should he overtake 
me. ‘ I shall either repulse him ’, I thought, ‘ or 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 

else he will slay me. No man can escape his 
destiny \ And in my tree I spent the whole 
day, but saw nothing of him. I had brought 
with me a scrap of meat, that I ate as soon as 
evening drew in. And thereupon I descended 
and set off walking all night, and, at the first 
gleam of day, had reached a plain thinly planted 
with trees. Advancing 1 saw naught but birds, 
wild beasts of unknown kinds, as well as 
snakes. There were springs of sweet water. 
I halted to pluck bananas and other fruit, and 
ate and drank. The monstrous birds were 
scouring to and fro over the plain. One of 
them I stalked. I had prepared strings of bark- 
fibre by way of rope, and, seizing the moment 
when it alighted to feed, I came up behind it 
and grappled myself to its leg and covertly 
made myself fast there, while it was busily 
occupied foraging. When the bird had eaten 
its fill and had drunk, it straightway took flight, 
described a circle, and I caught sight of the sea. 
I was resigned to death, but, never leaving the 
island, it settled on a mountain peak. In spite 
of my weakness, I cut myself loose and hurried 
away down the mountain-side, lest the adven- 
ture should turn out ill. The top of a tree was 
my refuge till next morning. Then I saw a 
column of smoke, and, thinking that smoke 
argued the presence of men, I pressed towards 
it. I had not gone far, when a troop of men 
accosted me. With parley that I could not 
understand, they took and led me to a village, 

i^9 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 

and shut me in a house, which already contained 
several other prisoners. My fellow-prisoners 
questioned me, and I told them my adventures. 
And, in their turn, they told me that they were 
aboard a certain ship, going from Senf to 
Zabedj, had been overtaken by a storm, and 
that, twenty in all, they had saved themselves 
in the long-boat and landed on this island. 
The inhabitants laid hold of them, cast lots, 
and, up to the present, had eaten a considerable 
number. Alas ! I was bound to admit that 
here I had run into even greater danger than 
with the monstrous shepherd. However, I was 
somewhat consoled by observing my com- 
panions of misfortune. Eaten I might be, yet 
death seemed to me of small account ; so do we 
console ourselves by the reflection that our 
misfortune is shared. Next day they brought us 
sesame or some grain like it, together with 
bananas, butter, and honey. All this was set 
before us. ‘ Thus have we been fed ever since 
we fell into their power ’, said the prisoners. 
Each man took his share of sustenance, and 
presently the anthropophagi came and felt us 
over one by one, and chose him who appeared 
fattest. We bade him good-bye. Already we 
had confided one to the other our last wishes. 
They drew him into the middle of our lodging, 
anointed him with butter from head to foot, 
and made him sit in the sun for the space of two 
hours. Then, clustering round him, they slit 
his throat, carved him piecemeal under our 
i€o 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 

eyes, roasted and ate him. A portion was 
stewed and another eaten raw with salt. When 
they had finished their meal, they swilled down 
a liquor which made them drunk, and fell 
asleep. ‘ Come ’, I said to my companions, ‘ up, 
let us kill them while they lie drunk. Then we 
will walk straight in front of us, and, if we 
escape, the Glory be to God ; and, if we 
perish, were it not better to die than continue 
longer in this fearful plight ? If the inhabi- 
tants take us, we can die no more than once ’. 
But my words could not determine them, and 
night came on without any resolution being 
formed. Our masters brought us food, as their 
custom was. One, two, three, four days slid 
past, but never altered our condition. The 
fifth day came, and again they chose one of our 
number and dealt with him as before. This 
time, while they lay drunk and asleep, we fell 
on them and slit their throats to a man. Each 
of us took a knife, a little honey, a little butter, 
and a little sesame, and, as soon as night had 
wrapped the earth in her shadow, we stole forth 
from the house, — by day we had marked its 
situation, — and set out, anxious to gain the sea- 
beach at some point remote from the village. 
Arrived in a valley, we hid close beneath the 
trees, fearing we should be discovered. We 
were seven or eight. Day went past, and Night 
returned, her shadows favouring our march, 
which we continued along the beach, directed 
by the stars. At last, we judged ourselves clear 

1 6 * 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 

of the Anthropophagi. We rested and ate 
bananas and the other fruit which the country 
afforded. And this went on some time, till we 
came to a sort of glade, where there was 
an abundance of delicious sweet water. We 
resolved on staying there, till a ship should 
rescue us or our lives should end. Three men 
died, and our number was shrunk to three. 
But, one day, as we walked the beach, what 
should we see but the hulk of a long-boat, 
cast up by the waters, wherein lay several 
rotten corpses. She was sunk in the slime, 
battered by the waves, and altogether much 
dilapidated. We drew out the corpses, flung 
them into the sea, and put the long-boat to 
rights. The island provided a clay, which we 
used, instead of pitch, to caulk our craft. With 
a tree-trunk we fashioned a mast, rigging with 
the fibrous leaves of cocoa-nut trees, and sails 
with flax. The hold we stored with cocoa-nuts, 
different fruits, and a provision of sweet water. 
One or two of our company understood 
navigation, and fifteen days’ sail brought us to 
a village of Senf, where we told our story, and 
they gave us what we needed. Then we 
separated, and each of us set off whither he 
would. For my part I returned to Basra 
This man had been away from home full forty 
years. Meanwhile, most of his kin had died. 
His father had left children, who refused to 
acknowledge him. His property had been 
divided, when news of him ceased to come. 

yS2 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


Previously his condition had been affluent and 
his lot easy, but he died without recovering any 
part of his fortune. 


CXXIII A sailor has informed me that 

he made the crossing from Serira to China 
in a sambouq . “ We had come ”, he said, “ a 
distance of fifty % ama , when a storm burst over 
our vessel. A part of the cargo was sacrificed. 
Several days the storm lasted, and the wind 
raged so high that we could no longer steer. 
Seeing death at hand, we considered throwing 
ourselves into the water and striking out for 
a neighbouring island. Anchors cast, we had 
given ourselves up as lost. Suddenly, the 
tempest calmed, and we noticed on the island 
a troop of natives, and waited till one of them 
should approach us. But not one of them 
budged. We made signs to them, which they 
did not understand. We knew not whither 
we had come, persuaded, moreover, that, did 
we set foot on land, they might receive us ill, 
and that, not far away, there might be another 
troop, who would fall upon us, without our 
being able to offer any resistance. Thus, we 
spent four days, never daring to disembark and 
never an inhabitant venturing near us. How- 
ever, on the fifth day, we took the necessary 
resolution, since we needs must replenish our 

163 



THE MARVELS OF INDIA 


provision of water and inquire where we might 
be. Thirty of our people pushed off, armed, in 
the long-boat and the dinghy. We drew near, 
and the natives fled ; only one of them stayed 
on the shore. He addressed us in a foreign 
tongue. A man of our company was able to 
understand him. ‘ This island ’, he said, ‘ is 
part of Waqwaq ’. Questioned about these 
two islands, he replied that they belonged to 
Waqwaq and were situated three hundred 
parasaugs from any other land, and that there 
were no other inhabitants but them, and that 
they numbered forty. Asked which course we 
had best follow, in order to reach Senf, he gave 
us the necessary directions. And when we 
had watered, we set sail for Senf, according to 
his instructions, landing there safe and sound, 
after a voyage of fifteen ^ama. 


Here ends The Book of the Marvels of India. 
Peace be with us ! May God, the best of 
protectors, have us in his care ! 

Glory to God, Master of the worlds. 


