"The Commentaries Of Afonso Dalboquerque Vol.1"
See other formats


THE 

COMMENTARIES 

OF THE GREAT 

AFONSO DALBOQUERQUE 

SECOND VICEROY OF INDIA 






^ATIC S> jC4tTf 


THE 


COMMENTARIES 

OF THE GREAT 

AFONSO DALBOQUERQUE 

SECOND VICEROY OF INDIA 


TRANSLATED FROM THE 
PORTUGUESE EDITION OF 1774 

WITH NOTES AND AN INTRODUCTION BY 

WALTER DE GRAY BIRCH 


I N FOUR VOLUMES 
VOLUME I 



ASIAN EDUCATIONAL SERVICES 

NEWDELHI ★ MADRAS ★2000. 



COMPUTERJSiffj 


ASIAN EDUCATIONAL SERVICES 

31. HAUZ KHAS VILLAGE. NEW DELHI - 110016 
Tel. ; 6560187. 6568594 Fax : 011-6852805. 6855490 
e-mail : asianedsQnda.vsnI.net.in 

5. SRIPURAM FIRST STREET. MADRAS - 600 014. 
Tel. : 8265040 Fax ; 8211201 
e-mail asianedsOmdS.vsnl.net.in 


923. J09-5^ 

v.a 


THE ASIZ-^TIC GOCIETM 
KOLKm r/ -700 016 
ACC. 

^L-Ko ,d0 "^53 


Price : Rs. 2095 (set) 

First Published : London. 1876 
AES Reprint : New Delhi. 2000 
ISBN . 81-206-1S14-X (set) 

Published by J. Jetley 

for ASIAN EDUCATIONAL SERVICES 

31. Hauz Khas Villaoe. New Delhi • 110 016. 

Processed by Gautam Jetley 

For AES Publication Pvt. Ltd.. New Delhi-110016 

Printed at Subham Offset Press DELHI • 110 032 





THE 


COMMENTARIES 

OF THE GREAT 

AFONSO DALBOQUERQUE, 

SECONH VICEROY OF INDIA. 


TRAV8I.ATBD VkOU THR 

«i 

PORTUGUESE EDITION OF 1774, 

i^otes anti an Sntrolinction, 

By 

WALTER DE GRAY BIRCH, F.RS.L. 

4BIIIOH BaaUTAMT OT TBB DBrABTMUT OF 111.11 VK Kim IK TRK KKITIKR 
MOaKUH i ■OHOKIKI KCianiKT OF TRK BKITItfl 
ARCBROLOOlOlli AMOCIITIOM, ETC.. 


" ut. quantum ad cognitionem pertinei rerum, otiam praeteritis aaecolis vizisse 
vidoamur.’*— QuiVTii;.iA]r, Tnatit. Oraior., xii, 4. 


LONDON: 

PRIN'l’ED FOB THE HAKLUYT SOCIETY. 


'nnco.liXRT. 




LIST OF CONTENTS. 


Portrait of Afonso Dalboqubrqur FroniupUee 

iNlBODUOnON ..... PAGE 

Chronoloot of Part I . 

Title to the Edition of 1774, Era 

Epistle Dedigatort of Nigolao Paouarini to the 
Marquee db Poxbal 

To the Reader ...... 

1. Sketch of the Life end Chanwter of Afonso 

Dalboqneique .... 

2. Account of Afifonso Dalboquerque, the Tounger 

Epistlb Dedigatort of Affonso Dalboquebque, the 
Younger, to the King D. Sbbabzlao (ongiiuJlj 
prefixed to the Second Edition of 1576) 

Titles of the Chapters oontained in the First Part . 

ComCBNXABlBB OF AfONSO DaLBOQUBRQUB. PiWt I 

Map of Arabia, firom MS. Sloene, 197, fix 154 . 

Plan of Orxue, from the same MS., fo. 156 


i 

xxiii 

xxvii 

zxxi 

xxxvii 

xxxTii 

xlTii 

li 

liii 

1-256 

80 


112 




INTRODUCTION 


Qns glorioBu palmas teoer vejo, 

Com que victoria a fronte Ihe coroa, 

Quando sem sombra v8a de medo, ou pejo, 

Toma a Ilha illuatrisBima de Qoa ! 

Despois, obedeoendo ao duro enaejo, 

A deiza^ e oocaaifio eapera boa» 

Com que a tome a tomar; que eafor^o, e arte, 

Venoeriko a Fortuna, e o proprio Marte. 

** Eia Bobre ella toma, e vai rompeudo 
For muroB, fpgo, langaa, e pelouroa, 

Abrindo com a eapada o eapeaao, e horrendo 
Eaquadrflo de OentioB, e de Mouroa : 
lifto BoldadoB indytoB f azeudo 
Maia, que Ledea famelicoa, e Touroa, 

Na luz, que aempre oelebrada, e dina 
Ser& de E^gyptia Sancta Catharina.’* 

CAMdE^ Lunada, z, 42, 48. 

" What glorioua Palma do I aee weaving There, 

With which hia forehead Yiotort will crown 
When without ahadow or leaat toudi of fear 
He ahall win Goa's Isle of blight renown I 
But then (the Storm obeying) will not bear 
So great a Sayle, and takes that Bonet down : 

To reattempt the thing in fitter season. 

Fobtuns and Mabs fear Vaiaur joyn'd with Beaaon. 

And (aee) he does it ; diaigeB undiamay'd 
Through vHiUa, through Pyhea, through BvBeia, and through^re : 
. Opens the quilted Squadnma with hia Blade 
Of Moobs and Pagans knit in Zeayuea intira t 
Hia gallant SMiera in more blood ahall wade 
Then Lyona pin'd, Btdla prickt with love and Ire ; 

Upon the Feaat (aa pat as by deaigne) 

Of EoTFr's Mdriyr^ Kathbrikb. 

Fanshaw. 


Therk is no doubt that, to whomsoever the world 
may adjudge the pride and glory of first setting his 

b 



11 


INTRODUCTION. 


European foot in the Bast Indies, the Portuguese 
nation, when in the zenith of its energy and vitality, 
was the first to make use of the discovery, the first 
to bring the knowledge of these climes to a practical 
issue and to a fortunate result. 

Among the illustrious band of noble heroes, whose 
chief pleasure it was ever 

“ To scora delight, and live laborious days”, 

performing their allotted part well, if we judge them 
according to the lights of their own times, perhaps a 
little fiercely, if rated by a more modem 'standard, 
never hesitating, for all that, to put their lives in 
jeopardy, or to relinquish them, provided only they 
might so best execute the commands and achieve the 
wishes of their Sovereigns in opening up new Channels 
of trade and commerce, new Tracts of Empire, in a 
word, new Worlds, stands pre-eminent the Great Afonso 
Dalboquerque, the Second Viceroy of Portugal in India, 
whose deeds of martial valour, whose intrepid spirit, 
whose kingly aptitude for supreme power, are now for 
the first time, from the original text, presented to the 
English reader in the English tongue. 

Of the Biographical features of his Life, the text of 
these Commentaries, compiled by his natural son, Braz 
Dalboquerque (who, after the death of his father, 
assumed the name of Afonso), from the dispatches 
forwarded to the King Dom Emmanuel, forms the 
principal fountain of origin. From these the history of 
the illustrious warrior and navigator has been compiled 
with more or less accuracy for every Cyclopedia, and 



INTRODUCTION. 


iii 

finds a place’ in every Dictionary of Biography. A very 
great number of printed accounts of Afonso Dolbo- 
querque’s life also exist in works treating of Indian 
History, and they may be gleaned with profit for con- 
sideration and remembrance. It is my intention, in 
the Introduction of this present volume, to give some 
account of the two editions of the ** Commentarios”, 
viz., of 1576 and of 1774 ; a notice of two manusmpts 
which are deposited in the British Museum, Sloane 
MS., 197, and Additional MS., 20901 ; and a sketch 
of the character of our hero derived from the text of 
the “Commentarios” and other authorities. The prin- 
cipal points of his biography are given in the translated 
prefaces. 

The edition of 1576, a fine copy of which is pre- 
served in the Grenville Library in the British Museum, 
bears the following title : — 

“CommentarioB | do Grande Afonso | Dalboquerqne, 
capitam Geral | que foy das Indias Orientaes, [ Em 
tempo do muito poderoso Bey domj Manuel, o pri- 
meiro deste nom’e | 

" Nonamente emendados & accrescentados pelo mesmo 
Anctor, | conforme &s infonnaqoes mais certas que 
agora teue. | 

“Yfto repartidos em qnatro partes segundo o tempo 
dos I acontescimentos de sens trabalhos. | 

*'Em Lisboa. | Com Licen^a impresso por loao do 
Barreira impressor del Hey | nosso s^nbor. Anno do 
1576. I Com privilegio Beal, j 

This rare book is of quarto size, printed in a fine 


‘ The best will be found in Iloeffer’s Wouvelle BiographU GinS- 
rule, Paris, 1855. 



IV 


INTRODUCTION. 


bold fioman pica type, leaded, and contains 578 pages 
of about 35 or 36 lines to a full page. In the numera- 
tion of the chapters of the Mrst Part, chapter zvii has 
been, by inadvertence, made ziz, and the error is con- 
tinued throughout the First Part. A small slip, pasted 
on the fly-leaf at the beginning of tiie Volume, con- 
tains the following manuscript note, in the hand of 
the illustrious collector of this invaluable Library. The 
note is as follows 

^'Alboqnerqne Gommentarioa. fa Lisboa, 1576. This is 
an improved edition of the Commentaries of Alboqoerqne 
by his son, who had Brst edited them in 1557. 

"Magni ssstimator hoo opus a Lnsitanis, qnippe qnod 
e relationibas fide dignissimis baostam, hand vnlg^ari prn- 
dentia et dezteritate compositnm, histone et g^ographie 
Indie mazime inserrire qneat.” MeuseUua, ii, 2, 32. 

" The first vol. of Lafitau D4couvertes is translated from 
Alboqnerqne.” 

With regard to the statements in this note, I must 
confess that I have never been sufficiently fortunate as 
to see the first folio edition of 1557, nor do 1 know of 
any printed account of this work better than that con- 
tained in the biography of Aflbnso Dalboquerque the 
Second, which will be found among the prefatial matter 
translated and placed before the translation of the 
tezt. The second statement may be well endorsed by 
those who will give themselves the trouble or pleasure 
of reading the Commentaries, either in the original 
Portuguese, or in the present English translation. The 
third and concluding sentence of the note is entirely 
erroneous. Lafitau, in his ezcellent work entitled — 
“Histoire dea D^couvertes et Conqu^Aea dea Porttigata 



I 


INTRODUCTION. V 

dans Is Nouveau Monde. Par U R. P. Joseph 
Frangois LaJUau de la Compagnie de Jesus. A Paris, 
MDCCXXXiii” — ^undoubtedly made good use of these 
Commentaries, as indeed he was bound to do; but 
nothing can be more unfounded than the assertion 
that Lafitau’s first volume is translated from Albo- 
querque. His history of the Discoveries of the Portu- 
guese in India is a carefully written digest of the prin- 
cipal aiithors who have discoursed so fully and ex- 
haustively on this subject, such as Barros, Osorio, Goes, 
Castanheda, etc. ; .and a mere translation of these Com- 
mentaries would have hardly sufficed to chronicle the 
extensive operations of this active nation in the Asian 
seas. 

The other edition which I have occasion to mention 
is that of 1774, in octavo. The original title of this 
is thus given : — 

" Gommentarios | do grande | Afonso | Dalboquer* 
qno I capitao geral | que foi | das Indias Orientaes | em 
jbempo do nmito poderoso | Bey D. Mannel | o primeiro 
deste nome | Parte I. | lisboa | Na Begia Officina 
Typograpbica | Anno UDCCixziv. | Com Licenqa da 
Beal Mesa Censoria, e Privilegio BeaL’* 

The First Part^. that is Volume, contains 343 page^ of 
30 lines to a full page. It relates to the first and 
second visits made by Afonso Dalboquerque to India, 
and the proceedings at Ormuz as far as the flight of 
the Captuns, and the raising of the blockade by Afonso, 
who -makes his way to Cananor and meets the Viceroy 
whom he is about to supersede. 

The Second Part contains 285 pages. This volume 



VI 


INTEODUCTIOW. 


relates the circumstances with reference to the appoint- 
ment of Afonso Dalboquerque as Viceroy, in the place 
of Dom Francisco de Almeida ; and the events which 
took place during the interval of time from his arrival 
at Cananor early in December, a.d. 1508, and establish- 
ment in the Viceroyalty, until the taking of Goa for 
the first time. 

The Third Part^ of 289 pages, commences its narra- 
tive with the latter part of the year 1510, and con- 
tains the history of the second successful attempt upon 
Goa, and the events in connection with the extension 
of the Portuguese operations in Malacca, and concludes 
with the departure of Afonso Dalboquerque for the 
Straits of the Bed Sea, in pursuance of his intention of 
conquering Ormuz and establishing the Portuguese 
rule in that part of Persia. 

The Fourth and concluding Part, of 256 pages, is 
devoted to the arrival of Afonso Dalboquerque at 
Adem and places on that coast, his cruises to Calicut, 
Cananor, Cochim, Goa, and other ports, his operations 
at Ormuz, his death, and a geneal(^cal sketch of his 
family. The account given in this place probably fur- 
nished materials to the author of the biographical 
account of Afonso Dalboquerque in the introductory 
matter before the text of the tot part. The transla- 
tion of this account follows this Introduction. 

The present volume of the translation will be found 
to contain the whole of the First Part A subsequent 
volume will be given to the Second Part with an In- 
troduction relating to the foundation, rise, progress, 
and decay of the Portuguese Empire in the Eastern 



INTRODUCTION. 


Vll 


Indies ; and some Bibliographical Notes in reference 
to the Indian Cycle of Portuguese Literature. These 
two prolific subjects could hardly be treated with that 
consideration to which they are entitled in the space 
at our command in this volume. I therefore shall 
limit my remarks to the character of Dalboquerque, and 
some reflections upon the study of the Portuguese 
Language. The Third and concluding Volume will 
contain the remainder of the translation. Parts III and 
IV, with an Appendix and Indices. 

Before, however, entering upon the life of this great 
man, it will be profitable to call the reader^s attention 
to two most valuable Manuscripts in the British 
Museum. The first^ is in the Sloane Collection, No. 
197, and consists of 423 large folios, written on paper, 
by the author, “ Captain Pedro Barretto de Resende, 
Professed Knight of the Order of St. Benedict of 
Avis,' and a native of Pavia,” in the year 1646. 

The contents and great importance of the volume 
will be best gathered from its title, which is as follows : — 

" Livro do Estado da Tudia Oriental Bepartido em 
tree partes, a primeira Contem todos os retratos dos 
Vizorreis qne tern avido no dito estado athe o anno 
de 684 com descripsols de sens goremos. 

" A Segnnda parte contem as plantas das Fortalezas 
qne ha do cabo da boa esperanqa athe a fortalleza de 

^ Cf. the account of this MS. and its pictures, in the Hon. 
H. K J. Stanley’s Tkrtt Voyage* of Vasco de Oatna, p. ix (Hakluyt 
Society). 

’ A Military Order of Cistercians in Portugal, instituted by King 
Alphonso I, in the middle of the twelfth century, to commemorate 
the capture of Evora from the Moors. 



Vlll 


INTRODUCTION. 


Chaiil o com larga descrip^ao de tndo ho que hd em 
cada hua das dittas fortalezaSj Bendimento e gasio qae 
tern, e tado o mais quo Ihe toca. 

** A terceira contem as plantas de todas as fortalezas 
que ha de Goa athe a China^ com descripqao da mesma 
forma, e Yao juntamente plantas de fortalezas que nao 
sao do estado que por estarem nas mesmas costas se 
puzerao por curiozidade. 

'^Feito pello capitao Po. Barrette de Besende^ Oaual- 
leiro professo da Ordem de Sao Bento de Auis, natural 
de Pavia, Anno de 1646/^ 

That is— 

Book of the State of Eastern India, divided into 
three parts ; the first contains all the portraits of the 
Viceroys there have been in the said state, until the 
year [1]634, with accounts of their government. 

“ The second part contains the plans of the Fortresses 
that reach from the Cape of Good Hope to the Fortress 
of Ghaul; and with a full description of everything 
there is in every one of the said fortresses, their 
Bevenne and Expenditure, and all the rest that con- 
cerns them. 

** The third contains the plans of all the fortresses 
that reach from Goa to China, with a description of the 
same kind ; wd with these are given plans of fortresses 
which do not appertain to the State, but they have 
been inserted out of interest because they are upon the 
same coasts. 

'^Made by Captain Pedro Barretto de Besende, 
Professed Knight of the Order of St. Benedict of Auia, 
a native of Pavia, in the year 1646.’^ 

This Manuscript claims a great interest from all who 
desire to extend their knowledge of the state of India 
in the early years of the seventeenth century, and it 



INTRODUCTION. 


IX 


is well worthy of being printed hereafter by means of 
some such Society as the Hakluyt. It is only by the 
liberal action of this and kindred literary publishing 
societies that such great histories of bygone times can 
be reproduced and disseminated far and wide among 
those who delight in reading the original accounts of 
forgotten histories, and the exploits of their forefathers 
told in their own words. From this Manuscript (folio 
11), I have obtained, by permission of the authorities 
of the British Museum, an Autotype permanent pho- 
tographic facsimile of the portrait of Afonso Dalbo- 
querque. This, in the original, is executed with thick 
body colours, and subscribed “Afonso de Albuquerque 
2”,” that is, Afonso de Albuquerqtie, the Swond (vice- 
roy), by the same hand as that which wrote the text 
of the manuscript throughout. This portrait beats a 
great resemblance to most of the engraved portraits of 
the great Captain, and was in all probability copied 
from a panel painting at Goa in possession of the 
State, or in a collection belonging to the family of the 
Commander himself although Barretto de Besende 
does not state the quarters from which he acquired the 
beautiful series of full-length portraits of the Viceroys, 
which adorns his Manuscript. 

Folio 154 of this same Manuscript has furnished a 
map of part of the coast of Africa, of the coast of 
Arabia, and part of that of Persia. The entablature 
(iontains the following inscription : — 

** PetniB . Berthelot . primjm . («ie) 
oosmograpbienu . Indiano 
ram . imperiam . fiidebat . Act . 1635.** 



X 


INtKODUCTION. 


This inscription is written in a hand of the early seven- 
teenth century at the left hand upper comer of the 
map. I am unable to obtain any information regard- 
ing this cosmographer, who claims in his title, given 
above, to have compiled the first complete map of the 
Indian Empire, several portions of which havo been 
copied and placed in Pedro Barretto de Besende’s 
Manuscript ; but, as they are not noticed in the original 
List of Contents, I am inclined to think that they 
have been acquired and inserted subsequently by an 
owner of the volume. 

The same manuscript affords, from folio 156, an 
opportunity of giving a plan of the island and for- 
tress of Ormus, with the position of the adjacent islands 
of Lara or Larequa, and Queixome — places which are 
frequently alluded to in the text of the present volume. 

Finally, I have extracted from folios 11 and 12 of 
this remarkable book the concise account of the prin- 
cipal episodes in the career of Afonso Dalboquerque ; 
and as this has never, as far as I can gather, been 
printed, I need make no apology for its insertion in 
the present place : — 

Afonso de AUniquerque 2^ 

Afonso de Albnqaerqne, filho segando de Gonsallo de 
Albuquerque, senhor de Villa Verde, e de Dona Lianor de 
Menezes=EBtaleyro Mor que foy del Bey Dom Jo&o Segundo : 
Primeyro guovemador da India, e segundo No guovemo 
dolla : Partio de Lisboa por Capitam mor de sinquo Naos 
em seis de Mar^o de Mil quinhentos e seis como fioa dito 
pera Andar De Armada Na boca do Estreyto do Mar Boxo 
e Costa de Arabia aonde andou e por Toda A Costa da 
Judia atbe que nas Naos do Anno passado Ihe-Mandou El 



IKTRODUCnOK. 


xi 

Sej Dom Manoel A.- saccessao do governo da Jndia : qne 
Dorn Francisco De Almeyda Ihe nam qnis entregar sobre 
quo ouTO Tantos deferensas Entre Ambos qne mandon Dom 
Frandsoo de Almeyda A Afonso de Albnqnerqae preso para 
Cananor aonde estere athe cbegar ho Maricbal Dom Fer- 
nando Continho qne passando do Cananor Lerou Afonso 
de Albnqnerqae A Cochim e Ihe entregon ho gonverno do 
Estado da Yndia do qnal Tomon posse No fim De Onto- 
bro do anno de Mil qninhentos e No7e=:gaovernoa seis 
annos=Tomoa Goa Dnas YezessA primeyra em desascte 
de ferereyro do anno de mil qninhentos e des=e Pella 
Nam poder snstentar por ser em prinsipio de Jn^emo 
e Ihe faltai gente a Tomon a Largnar : e Esteve todo o 
Jnverao No Bio desde Bibandar athe pargim com anas 
Naos padessendo Jmmensos Trabalhos : E avendo grandes 
brigas com hos Monros da Ilha de Goa e snas adyasentes 
de qnem Teve mnytas Yitoriaa Tomandolhe o -Castello de 
Pargim e com a chegada das Naos do Beyno Tomon 
a Tomar Goa dia de sanota Catherina Yinte e mnquo de 
Norembro do mesmo anno de Mil qninhentos e des com 
grandissima Yitoiia qne Onve dos Monros e gentios : posto 
qne Com perda de Algds fidalgos: Tomon Malaqna em 
Jnlho de qninhentos E onze e a fortalleza de Ormns fes 
tribntario O Bey das Ilhas de Maldiua Tene em Calleont 
aqneUa briga em qne matara ho Mariohal Dom Fernando 
ContinhosMandon descobridores E Embayxadores a Mal- 
aqao=Fes Mnyta g^rra na Costa de Arabia No Tempo 
qne nella Andon por Capitfi Mor da Armada=foy sercar a 
Cidade de Adem No Estreyto do Mar Boxo=;E yndo de 
ftser a fortallesa de Ormns &Ilesseo na barra de Goa : Em 
desaseis de Deaembro de Anno de qninhentos e qninze fby 
sepnltado em Nossa Senhora da Serra qne Elle fandoa= 
E depois no Anno de mil qninhentos sesenta e seis forao 
sens Ossos Lerados para Portngnal: e posios na Capella 
Mor de Nossa Senhora da grassa qne ESle avia mandado 
edifioar.s 

The equivalent of this in English is as follows : 



INTKODUOTION. 


• • 
XU 


Afonso de Albuquerque, Second Viceroy. 

Afonso de Albuquerque, second son of Gonaallo de Albu- 
querque lord of Villa Verde, and of Dona Lianor de Menezes 
= Chief Equerry of the King Dom Joao the Second : Prin- 
cipal Governor of India, and second in the list of governors : 
He set out from Lisbon, as Chief Captain of five Vessels, 
on the sixth of March, 1506, as has been already related, to 
cruise with this squadron in the mouth of the Straits of the 
Bed Sea [Straits of Babel Mandeb] and on the Coast of 
Arabia, whither he went, and along the whole Coast of 
India, until the King Dom Manoel conferred on him the 
appointment of Governor of India, sending word by the 
ships of the previous year. Dom Francisco de Almeyda 
was unwilling to give up the command to him, whereupon 
there arose so many differences between the two that Dom 
Francises de Almeyda sent Afonso de Albuquerque a pri- 
soner to Cananor, where he remained until the Marshal 
Dom Fernando Coutinho arrived there, and he, being on 
his way to Cananor carried Afonso de Albuquerque to 
Cochim and delivered to him the Government of the State 
of India, whereof he took possession at the end of Octo- 
ber, 1509=:He governed for six yearB=Twice he captured 
Goa=The first time on the sixteenth of February 1510 
=And as he was unable to hold the city because^the 
winter had commenced, and he was short of men, he had to 
evacuate it : and he remained the whole of the winter in the 
Biver from Bibandar to Pargpm, in his ships, undergoing 
immense diflSculties, and experiencing great hostilities from 
the Moors of the Island of Goa, and the adjacent places. 
Over these he gained many Victories, capturing from them 
the Castle of Pargim. And when a fieet arrived from Portu- 
gal he took Goa for the second time on the day of St. 
Catharine, the 26th of November, of the same year 1610, 
gaining a very complete Victory over the Moors and 
heathens, although it cost him the lives of several fidalgos.^ 

^ See the extract fiom CamSes at the commeuoement of this 
Iiitrodiictiou. 



INTRODUCTION. 


XIU 


He took Malaca in July 1511, and the fortress of Ormns. 
He rendered the king of the Mfddive Islands tributary [to 
Portugal], He had in Callecut that disturbance in which 
they killed the Marshal Horn Pemando Oontinho=He sent 
explorers and Ambassadors to Malaca=He made many 
wars on the Coast of Arabia during the period that he held 
the post of Chief Captain of the Fleet. He set out to 
blockade the city of Aden in the Straits of the Bed Sea. 
And as he was making his way to cany out the construction 
of the fortress of Ormus he died on the bar of Goa, on the 
16th of December, in tho year 1515. He was buried in the 
Church of Our Lady of the Heights, "Nossa Senhora da 
Serra", which he had founded. Aud afterwaids, in the 
year 1576, his remains were transported to Portugal, and 
laid in the principal chapel of the Church of Our Lady of 
Grace, “ Nossa Senhora ^ Grassa”, which he had ordered 
to be built. 

The Additional Manuscript 20901 was purchased 
by the Trustees of the British Museum at Lord Stuart 
de Hothesay’s sale in June 1855 (Lot 2010). It is a 
quarto volume, on paper, measuring eleven inches by 
eight, of 23(1 folios, each containing about 26, 27, or 
28 lines to a page, written in very confused chancery 
hands of the sixteenth century, evidently the work of 
two or more scribes. At fo. 202, some passages have 
been omitted and afterwards supplied in part from the 
mutilated leaf of the originaL 
The title of this manuscript is thus given in the 
sale catalogue prepared by Messrs. Sotheby and Wil- 
kinson : — 

2010. INDIA Hibtobu do Discobbimxnto b 

PBIHBIBAB CONQUIBTAS DA IhDU. MaHUSOBTPT. An 
oRieiMAL Account or thbsb Discovbbibs, written circa 
'*516, unfortunately wanting tJiefirtt four eJiapters, and 



XIV 


INTRODirCTION. 


th» narni of the Author, whose style is more aniiquated 
than that ofJ.de Bafros, or Bamiano de Ooes. 

The note in Portagucsc, written on a fly-leaf at the 
commeneement of the volaiiie, is g^ven at p. 101, 
n., from which it appeals that Manuel de Carvalho 
de Ataide gave the book to Fieire, a well-known 
liteiaiy Portuguesei, in the year 1714, and that it 
had at that time no binding, and was deficient in 
the beginning of the text. From an examination of 
the old pagination, it appears that seven folios are lost; 
portions of tiie folios 8, 9, 27, 28, 79, of the old 
atrangemeni^ now folios 2, 3, 20, 21, 72, are also want- 
ing; and the text ends abruptly, so that there is some- 
thing wanting at the end which was in proper position 
when Freire acquired the volume by gift in 1714. 

Folio 2 commences with these words : — ** Feitas 

assi estas cousas ” — ^the beginning of the text of 

Chapter 5. On folio 3& begins the first complete chap- 
ter, thus: — C”. 6. Como partiram de melinde e 
chegara a Calecut, e do que hi passarom.” The want of 
space prevents me from giving many of the headings of 
the succeeding chaptered uuv that of Chapter 9 helps 
to show tiie period of time embraced by this History. 
It is thus : — C*. Como p^ aluar ^3 cabral partio de 
lixboa p' capitam mor de xiiij vellas pa a India, e do q Ihe 
socedeo.” "How Pedralvarez Cabral set out from 
India as chief captain of fourteen sail, for India, and 
of what happened to him.” This expedition set forth 
on the ninth of March, a.d. 1500.^ In like manner. 
Chapter 12 is devoted to the account of the setting 

1 Brit Mua, Add. MS., 20902, fo. 3. 



IMTBODITOTION. 


XV 


out of JoSo da Nova, with four sail, which was on the 
15th of March, a.d. 1501.^ Chapter 14 gives the 
account of the mission of Vasco da Gama> 'with twenty 
ships,in February and April, a.d. 1502.* Chap. 1 9 begins 
the narrative which is most closely concerned with the 
present volume. "O’, xix. Da partida daffonso Dalbu- 
querqj & flP* dalbuquerq; & Antonio de Saldanha.’* 
The Manuscript ends in the middle of Chapter 97, the 
title of which is as follows : — " Capitollo 97. Como 
s' a" dallbuquerque tomon a Beformar para hyr sobre 
gnoa» e como fiz. Bey em Cochym.” 

There is no doubt that this Manuscript, imperfect 
as it is, contains very valuable information respecting 
the period of which it treats, namely, from the earliest 
time of Portuguese power in India until the establish- 
ment of the capital of that power in Gk>a. It especially 
recommends itself to the members of the Hakluyt 
Society, as it appears to have been hitherto unpub- 
lished, and to contain new matter relating to a (time 
and history of which the labours of that Society have 
taken so much cognisance. But the difElculty of: de- 
ciphering the peculiarly formed handwriting will detdr 
many £rom searching into its contents. 

The reign of King John I witnessed a great exten- 
sion of Portuguese naval enterprise,* which reached as 
fu as the most southern point of the Afncan continent, 
l^e first who actually doubled the Cape was Bmrtolameu 

1 IHd., fb. 4. * Ibid., fo. 5. 

* 0. W. Kocih, An BidanaA Yitm of JBuropean Natinu, 3id 
ed., London, n. <4, p. 81. — "Vf. S. Lindsay, Sidmy of 
lUdpping, 3 robi, 8vo. London, 1874. 



XVI 


INTRODUCTION. 


Diaz, the Portuguese Admiral, who, from the difficulty 
of succeeding in his efforts, named this cape the 
“ Stormy Cape”, a name which the King, with prescient 
min d, changed into that of " Good Hope”. Another 
Admiral, Vasco da Gama, extended the power of his 
country as far as India, landing at Calicut, on the 
Malabar coast, in 1498, early in the reign of King 
Manuel. Other navigators and commanders of this 
maritime nation, such as da Almeida, da Cunha, and 
de Castro, assisted in consolidating this European 
power in India and the parts east of the Cape of Good 
Hope. In the capture of Goa, Afonso Dalboquerque 
had ready to his hand a fortress almost impregnable, a 
splendid harbourage, a large and flourishing city and 
emporium of trade, placed in the very centre of the 
newly established Portuguese colonies. They found, 
indeed, not barren and uninhabited tracts of land, 
which required to be brought slowly into cultivation, 
and were alone amenable to an imported industry and 
stimulation, but powerful states and nations — rich, 
civilised, and teeming in abundance of wealth and 
luxuries, ready to fall without trouble into the hands 
of foreign invaders. 

“ There,” says Koch, “ nature and the industry of 
the natives produced or ffibricated those articles of 
commerce and merchandise which have since become 
an object of luxury to Europeans, at least until the 
activity of the Venetians had furnished the inhabitants 
of this part of the world with them in such abundance 
as to make them be regarded as articles of absolute 
necessity. This circumstance was the reason why the 



INTRODUCTION. 


XVH 


Portuguese never formed any other than mercantile 
establishments in India, which they erected on the 
coasts, without extending them into the interior. The 
working of the mines and the cares of agriculture were 
abandoned entirely to. the natives. 

" This era produced a total change in the commerce 
of the East. Formerly, the Venetians were the people 
that carried on the principal traffic to India. The Jew- 
ish or Mahometan merchants purchased, at Goa^ Oalicul^ 
and Cochim, those and other productions of the East, 
which they imported into Syria by the Persian Gulf, 
and into Egypt by the Sed Sea. They were then con- 
veyed, a laborious land carriage, either to Alexandria 
or Beyrout. Thither the Venetians repmred in quest 
of the luxuries of India ; they fixed their price, and 
distributed them all over Europe. This commerce 
proved a vast source of wealth to these republicans ; 
it furnished them with the means of maintaining a 
formidable marine, and of very often dictating the law 
to the other European powers : but, after the discovery 
of the new passage round the Cape, and the conquests 
of the Portuguese in India, the Venetians saw them- 
selves compelled to abandon a traffic in which they 
could not compete with the Portuguese. This was a 
terrible blow to that republic, and the principal cause 
of its downfall The Portuguese, however, did not 
profit by this exclusive commerce as they might have 
done : they did not^ like other nations, constitute com- 
panies with exclusive commercial piivil^;es; they 
carried it on by means of fleets, which the Govern- 
ment regularly despatched at fixed periods. In this 

d 



XVlIl 


INTRODUOTIOK. 


manner, the commodities of the East were imported to 
Lisbon, but the indolence of the native merchants left 
to other nations the care of distributing them through 
the markets of Europe. The Dutch were the people 
that profited most by this branch of industry ; they 
cultivated it with so much success, and under such 
favourable circumstances, that they at length succeeded 
in excluding the Portuguese themselves from this 
lucrative traffic, by dispossessing them of their colonies 
in the East” 

Such were the conditions under which the great 
Dalboquerque lived, and in which he exercised his 
espemal genius for widely spread conquest. Prompt 
vigorous^ decisive in his measures ; not fiercer or more 
cruel than the spirit of the age in which he lived ; im- 
partial in his strictness and sense of honour, as we 
may well note in tiie incident relating to the death of 
Bodriguez Dias. This affiur has been noted by all 
historians ; and the Bon. H. E. J. Stanley^ in his 
PrefiuM to the Three Voyages of Vasco da Qoma^ p. 
xli, gives a translation of the account contained in 
Bishop Osorio’s history. The same editor also men- 
tions (at p. xlii, note) the narrative of Castanbeda 
with relation to the same affiur. There is no doubt 
that Dalboquerque felt compdled to make tiio fate of 
this unfortunate offender an example to tiie other 
Portuguese who were under his command in Iiadia» 
and whose laxity of discipline would have probably 
resulted in some disaster to the tenure of that power 
which he did all he could to extend. He was also 
too wdl aware, from events which had occurred in 



INTRODUOnON. 


XIX 


Ormuz, that the enemy would not be behindhand in 
obtaining information respecting the -true state of 
their Portuguese subjectors, and would lose no oppor- 
tunity of encouraging insidioudy any attempts to 
weaken the power of the Viceroy over his officers. 
To this must be attributed tbe apparent harshness of 
Dalboquerque on this occasion, for he fdt that it was 
imperative on him to put a stop at once to acts of in- 
subordination before they became too extensive for 
him to control Camdes, however, blames him, and 
speaks of this affair as the single blemish on his bright 
shield of glo^.^ The insubordination of the Captains 
when besieging Ormuz, and the consideration shown 
by Dalboquerque to the offenders, is a proof that he 
knew when to forget and forgive; and the cruelties 
practised on the Persians and Arabs were probably re- 
taliations and the result of a conventional system of 
carrying on warfare in those regions, rather than a sort 
of gratuitous brutality invented and indulged in by the 
Portuguese conquerors. They themselves would, in- all 
probability, have suffered much worse, had they had the 
ill fortune to experience any serious discomfitures. 

An excellent exposition of the policy of Dalboquerque 
is g^ven in the Voyages already quoted (p. Ixii), whence 
we may condude that the Viceroy’s idea of reducing 
dty after dty, fortress after fortress and state after 
stat^ establishing in their places fortified stations or 
ffictories along the coast, was weak in its conception, 
and led in the end to the too great dispersion of the 
imperial power, and rendered it unable to concentrate 

^ Sec page 107, note. 



INTBODtJOTION. 


XX 

itself 'with sufficient rapidity, Sian, and weight of 
arms. He indulged in the acquisition of a vast em- 
pire or rather coast line, but n^lected the consolida- 
tion of. the countries which lay beyond, and so left 
behind him a series of weak points which were sure to 
be recovered by those from whom he had wrested 
them, as soon as the native power and the native policy 
of patience could exert itself and spring back upon the 
invadera The capture of Goa and formation of its 
city into the capital of the Portuguese empire in 
India is the most important act of Albuquerque’s life, 
and he will ever be remembered by this deed, which 
by itself is sufficient to render eternal the memory of 
the man who conceived and executed such an onerous 
undertaking. From this invincible position nothing 
has yet availed to oust the Portuguese, who ding to it 
as the English clung to Calais, when every other spot 
of territory on the European continent had been tom 
from their hands. 

There is no doubt that whoever will give some time 
and attention to the learning of Portuguese will find 
his labour amply requited by the advantages to be de- 
rived from the great mass of literature which the lan- 
guage possesses. The best idea of the proportions which 
this literature assumes — whether we incline more to 
admire the poetry, presided over ly the immortal 
Camdes, and the numerous aspirants to a share in his 
laurels, or whether we are more allured ly the prose 
epics of Portugal’s best days, when she was at the 
height of her power in India, and when she was pro- 
moting the extension of her rule in the Southern Con- 



nmtODUOTioir. 


XXI 


tinent of America — may be gathered firom Bouterwek, 
and the Bibliotheca Lusitana. It is sufficient for me 
in this place to express an earnest desire that the 
critical study of the Portuguese language may soon 
become more extended among us, and a more cordial 
literary intercourse between England and Portugal 
established. This may be best accomplished by multi- 
plying translations of standard works firam one lan- 
guage into the other. This present volume of the 
Commentaries of the Great Afonso Dalboquerque, the 
CsBsar of Portugal, is the result of the operation of 
these sentiments in my own mind ; and I shall feel that 
1 have gained my desires and succeeded in my inten- 
tions, if the remarks here expressed may induce other 
students to follow in the footsteps of those who, like 
Fanshaw, Mickle, Lord Stanley, and others, have taken 
their delight in introducing Portuguese works to the 
English through the medium of tranriations, and there- 
by fostering a mutual interchange of literary and sci- 
entific progresa The true position of the English rule 
in India, the traditions it maintains, the point of view 
from which it is looked upon by tbe native race^ can 
never be rightly understood until a better knowledge 
is acquired concerning the first impressions conveyed to, 
and made upon, the minds of Ike inhabitants by the first 
European nation which effected any extensive settle- 
ment among them. This fiact alone^ one out of many 
quite as pertinent which might be adduced, ought to 
convince ns of Ike importance of examining the classical 
literary productions of a nation justly celebrated at all 
times for enterprise and military proa'ess. 



INTRODUOnON. 


•• 

ZXtl 

I cannot doee theae introductoiy notes without 
patting on lecoid mj grateful recognition of services 
rendered me by Dr. W. Wright, Professor of Arabic in 
the University of CSambridge, who has kindly famished 
me with the' Arabic renderings of several names of 
persons and places mentioned in the tezt^ and of more 
or less obscure derivation. To my colleague, Mr. O. 
F. Warner, my special thanks are due for aid willingly 
given in the revision of the translation throughout. 

The Society is indebted to the Trustees of the British 
Museum for the permission tO reproduce, by photo- 
graphy, the portndt of Afonso Dalboquetque from 
Pedro Barretto de Resende’s Manuscript in the Sloane 
Collection. 


London^ Navembet, 1875. 



CHRONOLOGY OF PART 1. 


VA« 

zzxrii. Birlih of Afonso Dalboqnerqne . . jlj >. 1453 

zxxviii. He accompanies the squadron of King 

Alfonso Y to Otranto . . . 1480 

zxzTiii Takes part in the expedition to Graciosa 1489 
2. His first voyage to Asia . . • [6] Apr., 1503 

16. Leaves Conlfto for Coohim . . 12 Jan., 1504 

17. Leaves Oochim .... 25 Jan., 1504 

18. Doubles the Cape of Good Hope . 1 May, 1504 

19. Beaches Lisbon . . . End of July, 1504 

20. 21. Accompanies Tristfio da Cnnlia . 5 Apr., 1506 

55. Tristfto da Ounha leaves Socotra for 

India 1 Aug., 1507 

56. Afonso Dalboqnerqne fits ont his fleet 10 Aug., 1507 

59. Stands off Curia Mnria . .13 Aug., 1507 

132. Lands at Ormns . . . . 10 Oct, 1507 

142. Marks ont the fonndarions for the 

fortress at Ormns . . . 24 Oot., 1507 

209. Bemonstranoe of the disaflboted cap- 
tains to theYioeroy, against the 
operations at Ormns . . .13 Nov., 1507 

170. Letter of the captains to Afonso 

Dalboqnerqne .... 5 Jan., 1508 



xxiv CHRONOLOGY OF PART I. 

201. Afonso Dalboquerque takes up his 
quarters at the Cape of Guardafum 

End of Aprih 1508 

203. Anchors off S. Mig^uel ... 15 May, 1508 

210. Commission of inquiry into charges 

against Afonso Dalboquerque • 26 May, 1508 

211. Arrival of a fleet of three vessels 

from Portugal at Cochim 

About the same time 

218. Afonso Dalboquerque sets out for 

Ormuz . • . ... 15 Aug., 1508 

256. Arrives at Cananor • . [December, 1508] 



COMMENTABIES 

OF THK 

GREAT AFONSO DALBOQUERQUR 




COMMENTARIES 


OF THE GREAT 

AFONSO 

DALBOQUE RQUE, 

WHO WAS 

CAPTAIN-GENERAL OF THE EAST INDIES 


IN THE TIME OF THE VERY POWERFUL 

KING D. MANUEL, 

THIS FIRST OF THIS NAME. 


J^AA^r A 


LISBON : 

IN THE ROYAL PRINTING OFFICE, 

ANNO UDCCLXXIV ; 

IHf/t lAtenee vf thi Royal JUnml af Censors^ ami Royal Prhiltoe. 




TO THE MOST ILLUSTBIOUS 

AND 

MOST EXCELLENT LORD 

SEBASTIAO JOS£ D£ CARVALHO E MELLO, 

MARQUEZ DE POMBAL^ 

PRIME MINISTER AND SEGRETART OF STATE 
TO HIS MOST FAITHFUL MAJESTY 

KTC*., were., KTC. 




DEDICATION. 


Most Exgrllkmt Sir, 

Nothing obtains more commonly among those men^ 
whose spirits $ire not to be confined within the small limit 
of the sphere wherein either Nature or Fortune -has placed 
them^ than the employment of the greatest force^ whereby 
they may overcome the obstacles which trammel them and 
reduce them to the condition of the many others over 
whom they desire to exercise superiority. Some by their 
deeds and virtues, yea and in spite of malice and envy^ 
finally achieve an universal reputation^ and having been 
encouraged by the good and rewarded with their deserts^ 
repay what they have received by the great benefits they 
aSbrd to the Public. Others, not aware of their powers, or 
perhaps estimating themselves at their own standard, yet 
being naturally ambitious, break through eveiy impedi- 
ment without any concern for what the better part of man- 
kind thinks or says of them, solely interested in acquiring 
for themselves the goodwill and favour of those in whose 
authority and power they found the basis of the hopes of 
what they desire to obtain. 

I, Most Excellent Sir, though far from placing myself 
among the few who belong to the first of these, certainly do 
not belong to the second class. Truth, seal, fidelity, 
obedience, and the desire of serving as far as strength will 
permit me, have ever been the principal bases whereon I 
have established the little I have done that I may not bo 



XXXii DKDICATION. 

withont merit And wbat I hare done, thongh bufc a little, 
Yonr Excellency was so good as to bring nnder the notice 
of the most Learned, the most Enlightened, and the most 
Generons of Monarohs, not only of Portugal but of the 
World. Thereupon Yonr Excellency further was pleased 
to consider me worthy of employment upon honorable 
works, and ennobled me and conferred snch and so many 
benefits npon me as I had never expected to receive. 
Would ihen that I knew how to riiow in loud voice how 
much I owe to Yonr Excellency for the many and great 
fovonrs that I have ei^rienced at yonr lunds. But 
since my genins is not able to soar so high, Yonr 
Excellency most permit me to call the whole World to wit- 
ness this my. confession, tiiat never in time to come I may 
venture to speak in other tiun these terms without con- 
victing myself of fidsehood and without arriving at the 
lowest point of ingratitnd& 

This .new Edition of the OommmtarieB of the Great Afoneo 
DaUboqaerque, containing the most illustrious Deeds of the 
Fortngnese Nation — an nnintermpted plan of an excellent 
Government, and of a policy firmly grounded, and truly 
Christian — ^whioh shall serve as it were for a spur to the 
noble hearts of the Portuguese, recalling to their memory 
so many examples of bravery, of glory, and of virtue, that 
they may never lose sight of the grand deeds of eras more 
fortunate than their own: this,I Bay,is the work which I have 
the honour to present to Yonr Excellency, desiring yonr Ex- 
cellency win permit it to forth nnder yonr honourable 
name, to be restored to the light of the world. This work 
win cause me to be heard by all, for aU with one accord 
reverence and admire yonr Excellency and take an interest in 
all that Yonr Bxoenenqy patronises, encourages, and sanc- 
tions. Thus not only by the natural impulse of my mind, 
which yet must always evince its gratitude, but even by the 
secnrity of my honour and credit, I shall always bo obliged 



DSDIOATIOK. 


xxziii 


to bear witness to this veiy troth. I am well aware that 
jonr Excellent^, as the great Planet which imparts its light 
to the others, and receives from none, vivifies and exalts all 
with yonr benefits without searching for other recompense 
than yon possess of yourself, seeing that yon know how, and 
are able, to give felioify to so many. But among the im- 
mense nnmber of those who have been protected by Tonr 
Excellency, thongh there are many whose willing duty it is 
to demonstrate their gratitude, yet there is the abominable 
example of others who have not so done : and these latter 
force the former even more than ever to give proofs of their 
goodness. Therefore it is, that apart from many reasons 
whidi compel me to free myself firom so infiunons a stain, I 
shall repeat here and for ever that by the hands of Your 
Excellency alone all the benefits, with which m the sight of 
the World I have been rewarded, have been conferred 
upon me. 

To this, and this alone, I can attribute the accomplishing 
of. my obligations. For to undertake to praise the mag- 
nanimily of Yonr Excellency, the sublime talents and heroic 
actions for the gcx>d of the State, of mankind, of the World, 
would be as it were to pretend to set a price upon them, 
whereas I cannot appraise them : for Yonr Excellency alcme 
knows what yon are and what yon have done. And who 
is there who can be so presumptuous ? If there be any who 
bdieves he can estimate yonr worth, let him reveal the 
little that he knows^ and if he intend to make A panegyric 
upon yonr Exodlency let him forsooth parade his audacity. 

The G re a t Orator Tnlly used to say that the Roman 
Oitisens after a time ceased to applaud Csssar, for aU the 
applause that was due to him '*Obstnp^Mtis hominibns ipsfi 
admiratkme oompressns erat^ et eo prastermissns, quia nihil 
vnlgare dignnm Csssare videti potent.” What reasons are 
there, that the Portngnese Nation and most learned men 
should not apply the same with respect to yonr Excellency f 

/ 



xxxiv 


DEDICATION. 


I, truly, do so apply it. Therefore those who flatter them- 
selves th^ possess the inoate ability of pleasiiig the Pablio 
by becoming Panegyrists of Yonr Excellency will never 
seduce me with their example, and my respeotfnl silence 
will be the greater proof of my admiration. 

Yes, Most Excellent Sir, the great fame of yonr Exod- 
lency shall endure for ever, for the froit of yonr more than 
extraordinary talents, and of yonr sublime IGnistry, diall 
be experienced until the end of posterity. The World shall 
ever know by how much Yonr Excellency exceeded all in 
the most difficult art of governing People and rendering 
them happy. It shall admire yonr rare prudence in extir- 
pating abuses, yonr great bravery in overcoming the 
greatest difficulties, your firm ccmstancy in repressing the 
forces of those who for private interest^ or by ignorance, or 
by malice opposed the good of the State. It shtJl confess, 
that Yonr Excellency was bom to support the troe Religion : 
to vindicate the inviolable prerogatives of Sovereigns : to 
cnvilize mankind and unite them within the bonds of the 
most perfect scxiiety: to extinguish vices: to cultivate 
virtues. These effec:ts of the lofty comprehension and 
activity of Yonr Excellency shall ever be admired, as th^ 
shall ever exist; for all desire and protect that which they 
know to be useful. 

Above all, Portugal will attribute the JEpocih of its happi- 
ness and greatness to the time of the incomparable Ministry 
of Yonr Excellency. And what monuments shall it not 
have before it, to stimulate its voice and its recoUec^tion f 
A grand Capital, newly erected, and adorned witii the most 
sumptuous edifices, after its destruction by an earthquake 
and fire, whicsh overthrew it and reduced it to ashes: A 
Legislation founded upon the most solid principles, and dic- 
tated by reason and by Nature. Commerce, considered 
from the highest point of view, and increased and protected 
in spite of the envious and the jealous : Agriculture vindi- 



DBDIGATION. 


ZZXV 


Gated, enoonraged, and established as the principal basis of 
riches: Indostry animated: the Arts and Soienoes calti> 
rated : Mannfactnres introdoeed and at the same time 
brought to perfection. The kingdom garrisoned with im- 
pregnable forts, munitioned with troops in the highest state 
of discipline, and prorided with all that is wecessaxy to 
make it feared in war. The extermination of some men 
who pnt on an outward appearance of rirtne, bnt were in 
reality impious, powerful with what they possessed, and by 
means of the dominion they usurped, united into one sole 
body the better to resist monuohs and peoples, being them- 
selves disturbers of the government and of society. The 
immortal work, wherein in chronologioal order of oonseon- 
tive facts is demonstrated wirii latest evidence the aocnmn- 
lation of the atrocities those hostile men practised ever 
since their admission into this Kingdom, and the insuper- 
able necessity which there was of exterminating them. 
The recent and memorable foundation for the re-establish- 
ment of the Soienoes, rejecting all that the barbarities of 
past ages had introduced into them, when the lights of 
truth and reason were yet obscured, planting the solid prin- 
ciples upon which they were to be established after reducing 
them by brevity, dearness^ and method, entrusting the teach- 
ing of them to wise and renowned Masters, both native 
and foreign ; and forming such a code of laws and statutes 
as were never before seen, which will serve as a model for 
the cultivation of stndies to all enlightened nations. Bnt 
why do I go on noting what the Portuguese and all the 
World will have ever before their eyes and will admire with 
awe f Such being the monuments which exist and whidi 
immortalise your Excellency, it is useless to bring them to 
remembrance. They speak for themsdves, and in snoh a 
manner that the voice and force of doqnenoe yield to them. 

No, Sir, I have neither prused nor pretended to pruse 
Tonr Bxodlenoy. What I have hitherto said was the im- 



xzxvi 


DBDIOATIOK. 


petns of my onrestrained feeUng^, was the aign of my 
zeapee^ waa the liberty of my thonghta ; or to apeak more 
aoonrately was mistake, was error. But this error ia com- 
mitted by all, and so merits Yoar Exoelleac^'s forgireneas. 
Henceforth I moat oorreot myself and I commence from 
this moment, keeping a profound silence. May GK)d pre- 
serve Yonr Excellency many, many years for the gloiy of 
Oro Mohaboh, for the happiness of the Kingdom, and for 
the honour of the Nation and the World. 

Yonr Excellenqr’s 

Most obliged, obedient, and humble servant, 

Nioolao Paouabihi. 



TO THE READER. 


This Edition of the '' Commentaries of the Great Afonso 
ly Alboqnerqne'^^ which now comes forth from the press of 
this Royal Printinp^ Office, is the third which has been made 
in Portuguese, and was reduced to four volumes from eight, 
for easier use, and for the convenience of readers. As 
regards the elegance of the impression, and the diligent 
care that it should be published without defects and errors, 
it will speak for itself. And as it is intended tc issue in 
the same form other new editions of the more Classical 
Portuguese Authors, the printing of the Decades of Asia'' 
by the illustrious Historian Jofto de Barros has been already 
commenced, and will be continued with the grreatest dili- 
gence and application, so as to publish the whole work com > 
plete as rapidly as possible. In order to afford better infor- 
mation about these Commentaries and what they contain, it 
seemed convenient to introduce beforehand to the Header 
what is said by Biogo Barbosa Maeluido in his Bibliotheca 
LusUana Historiea, Oritica, e Ohronologica, fol. tom. L, pag. 
22, as follows : — 

D. Affonso De Albuquerque, sumamed the Great, by 
reason of the heroic deeds wherewith he filled Europe with 
ltdmiration, and Asia with fear and trembling, was bom in 
Ihe year 1158 in the Estate called, for the loveliness of its 
situation, the Paradise of the Town of Alhandra, six leagues 
distant from Lisbon. He was the second son of Gon 9 alo de 
Albuquerque, Lord of Yillaverde, and of D. Leonor de 
Meneaes, daughter of D. Alvaro Gonqalves de Ataide, Count 
of Atonguia, and of his wife D. Gniomar de Castro, and 



XZXVIU 


TO THE READEB. 


corrected this injustice of nature by climbing to tho summit 
of eyeiy virtne, both moral and political. He was educated 
in the Palace of the King D. Affonso Y, in whose palsastra 
striving emnlonsly to become a rival of this African l^rs, 
he set sail in the squadron commanded by this Prince in the 
year 14S0^ to sncconr King Fernando of Naples and re- 
press the fnry of the Tnrks who had invested Otranto, 
showing on this occasion that to reach heroic pitch, his 
bravery did not depend on the length of his service, bnt 
rather npon the liberality of Fortune toward him. 

"Not less was the glory his arm acquired in the expe- 
dition sent out in the year 1489 for the defence of the fortress 
of Gradosa situated on the island which the river Lnco makes 
close to the city of Laraohe, nnder the happy auspices of the 
King D. Jofto n, to whom he was Chief Equerry. These two 
famous and successful enterprises, one in Europe, and the 
other in Asia, were the fortunate prelnde of the victories of 
which Asia was soon to be the theatre, whither he sailed on 
the sixth of April, 1508 ; and after having performed deeds 
snperior to any other spirit bnt his own, he returned to 
Portugal more foil of glory than spoils, of which covetous- 
ness has more share than bravery. Having for a SMond 
time ploughed the seas as Captain in a squadron of fifteen 
ships, in company with Tristfto da Cnnha, to continue the 
triumphs of which his sword was the arbiter, the King D. 
Hanoel chose him Governor of India, of which he took 
formal possession on the fourth of November 1509. The 
prudent mind of the Monarch trusted that npon shoulders 
so robust as these the Empire would be able to remain 
impregnable to the violent irruptions of all the potentates of 
Asia. 

“It seems difficult to believe the continued current of 
victory achieved by the arm of this invincible Hero, who, 
just as a thunderbolt launched from the sphere which his 
Sovereign had taken for his device, left no portion of all the 



TO THE BEADEB. 


zxxix 


East, which did not experience the unfettered impnlse of his 
destmotion, redncing to ashes the cities of Brama, OrfaqSo, 
Calient, Pangim, and the nnmerons fleets of Heoa, Adem, 
and Ormnz. On two occasions he was crowned with Tictoiy 

the famons conquest of Goa, humbling the pride of the 
HidalcBo, on the second taking, in such a manner, that for a 
long time he lamented the fatal overthrow he suffered upon 
the walls of a place destined to be the head of the Portn- 
guese Empire in Asia. What leafy palms and laurels did 
not his invincible arm obtain at the surrender of 
whose heroic deed admiiing fome made known by three 
thousand months of bronze, — glorious trophies of sndi a 
odebrated attack. It was less owing to the violence of his 
sword than to the recq>eot in which his name was held, that 
the cities of Lamo^ Mascate, Benastarim, Calayate, and the 
Islanda of Oamaram, Queizome, surrendered, as did also 
HomeUfto at the death of two nephews of the King of Lareo. 

"To avenge the hostilities shown by the formidable fleets 
of the King of Ormuz and the HidaloKo, he made use of two 
elements, fire and water, burning and sinking some ships at 
Cape Bosalgate, and others in tiie harbours of Adem and 
Oaliont. The fame of the awe-striking actions, wherewith he 
had abased all the Bast, compelled the King of the Ides of 
Maldiva, Yengapor, and the HidalcEo to yidd, and implor- 
ingly seek him as a Guardian of their territories, and in 
corroboration of their obedience they made Ihemsdves 
tributary to our Grown. He reodved diflbrent embassies 
firom the Princes of Persia and Arabia, and from the Kinge 
of Pegd» Bengala, Pedir, SiSo, and Paoem, solioiting his 
fiienddup with generous donatives, flw whieh he benignly 
thanked them, bnt generondy rejected tim presents. 

"In order to preeerve the State impregnable to the inva- 
non of its enemies, he erected, with an expense equal to their 
magnifioenoe, the Fortresses ct Malaea, Ormnz, Calient, 
Cochim, and Cananor, inscribed on whose stmiea his name 



zl TO THE BBADEfi. 

is handed doim to posterity trader the glorions title of 
Founder of the Portngnese Empire of the East. Having 
oonelnded terms of peace with the kingdoms of Cambaia, 
Dabol, Onor, BatioaUL as &r as Cape Camorim, and with 
the Prinoes of China, Jaoa and Mainco, he fdt his last sick- 
ness fidl npon him when he was at Ormnz; and being 
desirons that Goa should be the setting, as it had so often 
been the rising, of his heroic labonrs, he set ont so enfeebled, 
that at four leagues distance from the haven, he rendered 
his unconquerable spirit to its Creator, with evident signals 
of its destination, on the sixteenth of December 1515, after 
rixty-three years of age, and ten of government. He was 
shrouded in the doak of the Military order of Sant-Iago^ of 
which he was a Oonmendador; and as soon as his body 
arrived at the Quay Gh)a, so Ingnbrions an uproar arose 
among the people that even the priests interrupted their 
eedesiastioal. chants with tears and sighs. 

"The natives, astonished to behold him with so long a 
bear^and having his eyes as it were open, asserted with 
superstitions credulity that certainly he was not dead, but 
.God had called him to be General of his armies. He was 
borne to his grave covered with the Pdl, and npon the 
shoulders of the principal persons of Goa, who buried him 
in the Chnroih of Our Lady of the Heights, which he had 
himself erected in gratitude for the fortunate success he had 
eiqterienced in the conquest of Malaca. At the deposition 
of his trinmplurat ashes the inhabitants assembled obsequi- 
. onsly with various offerings, hoping that he would be pro- 
pitious to their supplications. 

"After fifty-one years his remains were trandated, 
according to the desire expressed in his will, to the Convent 
of Our Lady of Grace, bdonging to the Beligions Hermits 
of St Augustine in this Conrt, whitiier his body was 
removed on the nineteenth of May, 1566, with the pomp 
befitting so great a Hero. In stature he was ordinary, his 



TO THE BKADEB. 


zU 

&ce long, and fredi-oolonred, hia nose aquiline, his aspect 
agreeable, and made venerable by tbe white beard wbiob 
reached down to his waist. He was perfectly intimate with 
the Latin tongue, and as discreet when he spoke as when 
he wrote. He was loved and feared, without his benevolence 
degenerating into partiality or his correction into rigour. 
He observed truth religiously, naturally abhorred lying, 
and executed justice promptly. In so many battles both 
by sea and land he had frequently been wounded, bearing 
witness with his blood, that he had ever sought the place 
where danger was more certain. He was profusely generous, 
giving to the Captains the spoils obtained in so many vic- 
tories, whereof he never reserved the least part for himself, 
for his desire was more for glory than for wealth. He 
always adhered to the utmost fidelity with his domestic 
enemies, and only brought his political sagacity to bear 
upon strangers. 

" There were two actions suggested by the magnanimity 
of his heart which he determined to perform. One was to 
divert the ohannd of the .Hile to the Bed Sea, and prevent 
it from miming through Egypt, thereby to render the lands 
of the Ghrand Turk sterile ; the other to cany away from 
M4oa the bones of the abominable Mafoma, that, these being 
reduced jmbliel^ to ashes, the votaries of so foul a sect 
might be confounded. His name will be eternally applauded 
by the voice of Fame^ as it was in tire thoughts of the 
greatest Ifonarohs, and by tiie pens of ^bittrioas writers, 
for H. Fernando, King of (hwtile,.p.nw8ed Urn' as an illna- 
trions captain to Pedro Correa, the Ambassador of the King 
D. Manuel, and the Grand Turk to D. Alvaro de Sande, 
Captain of the Emperor Charles Y. 

"Of the authors who have mentioned him the first is 
Maflfoo,^ towards the end of the fifth book of his History of 

' Johaanss FMms Ifaffsi: HSMsris fwfins, cias JjgModi Xsfste vfts, 
folio, Colon. Agity., 1889 and 1898. 



xlu 


TO THE READER. 


India. ^ProTBns invicti ad laborem, ao patientiam seqne 
corporis^ animiqne vir, et cum qnolibet 8U8B sotatia Dncnm^ 
yel nayalis scientiaBj vel expediti consilii magnitndine com- 
parandns.'” 

Faria,^ Jna Pariu^ueta, tomo i, Part II, oap. 10, n. 8 : <*Aquella 
espada oon ouya pimta ae ayia kbiado el Scetro, que ElRej Dom 
Manodi tenia no con menor interez de sub rentas, que reputaoion 
de BUS armas.” 

Gastanheda*, HuUma do Dtocuhrinunto da India^ liv. ni, oap. 
165 : **EafoToado e fiunoso Capitio...Em sumnui nenhuma ^irtude 
Ihe falleoeo para ser tSo singular GapitSo, conio o foram ob singu- 
lares, que ouye entre barbaros, Oregos, e Latinos.” 

Fr. Antonio de San Roman,’ Hiatoria Oenoral de Uklndia Orienn 
UU^ liy. n, cap. 9 : Dex6 el Imperio dela India mui quieta en la 
devooion, y fidelidad delBey D. Manoel, y el exeroioio de las 
annas quedb en su punto oon su industria, y las oosas de la Re- 
ligion en mucho augmento. 

Brentan.’ Epitome Chronolog. Mnod, ad annum 1515 : ‘<Ghria- 
tianissimuB Heros.” 

Maris,’ DiaJlogoe de Far. Biet., Didlogo 5 : ** Falleoeo em tSo 
daro nome de perfeito Govemador, que*n8o era faoil a questSo, 
que em sen louyor ae moyia, ae resplandeoia mais em suas ezcel- 
lenoias o esforoo de Alexandre, ou a sabedoria de Nestor ; porque 
administiaya a guerra oomo summo Emperador, e goyemaya a 
Republioa oomo perfeitisaimo Magistrada” 

* Muiod Seyerim de Faria : Asia Porivgveaa^ 8 tom., Idio^ Usbon, 
1686-1676. 

s Femando Lopes de Castanheda : HieUnria do Deaedbrimado 5* Coa- 
pdHa da India petoe P&rtngueaea^ 8 Usr., folio, Goimbra, 1662-1661. See 
also *‘T1ie first Books of the Historie of the Diaooiierie and Gonquest of 
ihe East Tndias enterpriaed by the Pbrtingales, in their daongeroos 
NaoigationB, in the time of King Dorn John, the aeooiid of that name. 
Translated into English by N. L. [JVicMaf Gentleman.” 

Quarto^ London, 1682. 

* Folio, Yalladolid, 1603. 

* IgnatiaB Brentano Gimardia: Epitame ChrondlegieaMmidi CkriatUnd 
db anno NaHmtatie Ckriod neqae ad eacnU doom octam anamn mgeamem 
sesfsm tseisnve dedneta, etc., folio, Augostm Vindeliooram, 1727. 

’ Pedio de Maris: DiaJtegoe de Fbria Hiateria doe Ragee de Partagai^ 
quarto, Lisbon. 1674. 



TO THE BEADEB. 


xliii 


Sampayo,! in cap. 2, Vita Beaii Petri Moreneie: ^'Inaignis ille et 
immortali laude dignua, atque Heroum antiquonim nninero meri- 
tiflsimo referri potest.” 

Barbuda^* JSmpreeae Miliiaret de Lutitanoe, foL 156, v. : ** Ad- 
queriendo triunfos a su Patna, j ganando Coronas a su Bey.’' 

la&tAn^^HistoiredeeD^uvert^ et Conguestee dee Portugaie^ tom. 
h pag- 520: ^'Dans la guerre il fut yeritablement grand par la 
noblesse de ses projets, et la prudence aveo laquelle il les exfouta. 
Dans le Conseil et dans Taction il paroissoit en lui deux hommes 
tous differens.” 

OforitM* de Mhu Bmmanudie, lib. 10: **Tanta namque erat 
humanitate prssditua, ut utrum magis multi illius virtutem metue- 
rent, an bonitatem ainarent, esset explicatu diffioillimum. Impri- 
mis autem jus sequabile oolebat, et fidem yiolatam acerrimd punie- 
bat^ neminique injuriam fieri patiebatur...Non erat alienus a lit- 
teris : et cum otium erat, lectione sacrarum prsacipud litterarum 
oblectabatur.” 

Thevet,* Viee dee Hammee lUuetree^ p. 422 : ** Fondateur de la 
domination des Portugalois en Inde.” 

Franoiscus de Santa Maria,* Ceo aberto na Terra, liy. in, cap. 
67: *^Na liberalidade, e magnificencia foi insigne, na oonstancia 
admirayd, na rdigiSo excellente, e em tudo Her6e da primeira 
grandeaa, glorioso assumpto das trombetas da Fama.” 

Neufuille,^ Hietoire Oiniral de Portugal, tom. ii, lib. viii, p. 466: 

> ? ChristoTam Fen ^ yia de Sampayo: Fids, e Keehoe dd Pfiucege 
Per/eeto D. Juan Reg de Portugal II date nombre, quarto, Madrid, 1626. 

• lujn Godlo de Barbuda : Empreeae. etc., quarto^ Lisbon, 1624. 

• For the entiie title, see page t. 

« D. leranimo Osorio: De rebue Emmanuelie Regie Luettanm viriute, 
et auepieiogeetie Hbri duodeeim, fdio^ LidxNi, 1571; and many subsequent 
editions. See aooount of the anthoor and his works in Diogo Barbosa 
Maehado: JMRaUieea LueUam Hkterica, etc., 2 rok, folio, LLsbon, 
1741-1747, toL ii, pp. 610, 616. 

e Andid Theret: Fist dee Homme Wmetne, fdlio^ Paris [1684] ; and 
8 Tda, quarto, Paris, 1671, eta 

• P. IVaneisoo de Santa Maria: O Ceo aberto na terra, Historia das 
Sagiadas Congrega^oens dos Conagos Seonlaies de S. Joige em Alga de 
Yenesa, ede S. Jdo Erangdiita em Portugal, foUo^ Lisbon, 1697. 

' Jaoques Le Qpiien de La Neiriville: Hietoere, eta, 2 tom., quarto, 
Paris, 1700. 



xliv 


TO THE READER. 


**C6 grand homme, cat Albuquerque le Orand, aussi heureux, 
et redoutoble pendant la guerre, que onunt et reverb pendant la 
paix, fut regrett6 de plusieura Princes qui avoient connu sa valeur, 
et toutes les nations qui avoient 6prouY6 sa olemence.*’ 

Telles,^ JSKftoria da Bthiopia Alta^ liv. i, cap. 7, and liv. ii, 
cap. 1. 

FV. Agostinho de Santa Maria,* Samd. Marian,^ tom. viii, lir. i, 
cap. 55. 

Barros,* Deeada //, da Hidoria da India^ passim. 

DamiSo de Goes,^ Chronica dd Hey Z>. Manoel^ Part III, cap. 80. 

Martin., Compendio de lae Hidoriae de la India Oriental^ pp. 
174-194. 

Gabriel Pereira,* Ulyuea^ Canto vn, 100 : — 

** Logo o IsmoBO Affonso o mar cobrindo 
De Nto^ os Malabares affugenta, 

Do gfio Neptnno as ondas opprimindo, 

One de sen grave peso jd rebenta.” 

Maoedo, Ulyoripo^ Canto xii, 56 : — 

** Se quereis ver o Cajatfio mais daro, 

Que a Fama conbeoeo, que vio a terra; 

Vede a Albuquerque inaigiie archivo raro, 

Que a diaciplina nuHtar encerra. 

Qnantaa vexes o vejo, mais reparo 
Neste grande varSo raio da guerra; 

Notai-o de vagar, que basts vd-1o 
Para ficardes do valor moddo.** 

The Commentaries of the heroic actions, performed in 

I Manoel d’Almejda : Hieteria geral da Eddojpia AUa^ on Prede Jodo^ 
dbrevitida polo Padre BaUkdsar Tdkz^ folio, Coimbra, 1660. 

* Fr. Agostinho de Santa Maria: Sanetearie Mariano^ e Hietoria daa 
Imagene^ etc., que ee venerea em a India Oriental, e nuUe canquittae de 
Portugal, Ada, Inglaterra, Africa, e Uhae FUipnae, tom. 8, quarto, Lis- 
bon, 1720. 

* Joio de Barros: Segunda Deeada da Ada, folio, lasbcn, 1568, and 
many subsequent editions, aee Biblioih^ LueUana, ii, 606. 

* Damiam de Goes: Ckramea do/eHeiedmo Beg D. Emmanvd, dMdida 
em quatro partee, folio, Lisbon,. 1566-1567, and 1619. 

* Gabriel Pereira de Castro: Ulgeeea, on IMoa edifeada, Poema 
Heroko, quarto, Lisbon, 1636. 



TO THE READER. 


xlv 


the East by the great Albuqaerqae^ written by his son^ were 
compiled from the despatches which the same Albuqnerqne 
forwarded to the King D. Manoel^ as the Author himself 
states in the Dedication of the said work to the King D. 
SebastiftOj in these words : — 

have dedicated to your Highness these Commentaries, 
which I have collected from the originals themselves^ written 
by the great Afonso Dalboquerque in the midst of his 
adventures to The KingD. Manuel, your Great grandfather.” 

Hence proceeds the idea of some writers (and among 
them the very learned Jofto Solorzano Pereira,' de Jure Ind. 
tom. i, liv. I, cap. 8, n. 48)^ that it is the work of the great 
Albuquerque himself. In addition to the despatches written 
by this Hero, which have served to form the Commentaries 
of his actions, there are printed herein the following com- 
positions by himself 

Two replies which he sent in answer to two letters from 
Gogeatar, Part I, chap. 62. 

Reply to. a letter from Lourengo de Brito, Captain of 
Cananor, Part II, ohap. 8. 

InstruotionB sent through Fr. Luis, of the Seraphic Order, 
to the King of Narsinga, wherein he gave him an account of 
what had taken place in the conquest of Calicut, Part II, 
diap. 17. 

Letter written to the Xeque Ismael, Part II, chap. 23. 

Instructions given to Ruy Gomes for the Xeque Ismael, Md. 

Letter to the King of Qrmu^ Mi. 

Letter to Gopicaifa, Chief Alguasil of the King of Cambaya, 
Part II, ohap. 46. 

Letter written to Timoja, Chief Alguasil, and Captain of 
the Forces at Goa, and Lord of the Lands of Cintacora, 
Part II, chap. 49. 

Letter to the HidaloSo, when he conquered Goa, Part III, 
chap. 4. 


1 JohaDfaes de Soloraano Pereira: DispuiatUmu de Indiarum Jure^ 
folio, Madrid, 1629 ; and reprinted in 1668, 1669. 



xlvi 


TO THE READER. 


InstraotioDB which he gave to Antonio do Miranda de 
Aaevedo, with a present for the King of SiSo, Part III, chap. 36. 

Letter written to the [Portuguese] Monarch on the Twelfth 
of December, 1515, when on the point of death, wherein he 
recommends to his notice the {ooraotion of his son, Part lY, 
chap. 45. 

This latter one also occurs in the Second Decade of Bar- 
ros, lib. X, ch. 8 ; translated into Latin by Ozorio, De Rebus 
Emmanuelis, lib. x : into •Castilian by S. Roman, Historia 
de la India, lib. ii, <^. 9 ; and into French by Lafitau, His- 
toire des Conquestes des Portugais, tom. i, p. 516.'^ 



“AFFONSO DE ALBUQUERQUE, 

Son of the celebrated Hero of whom the preyioaa memoir 
treats, was not only an inheritor of his virtues and heroic 
actions, but also of his very name. He was bom in the 
Quinta, which was the cradle of his great Father, close to 
the Town of Alhandra, situate upon the banks of the Tagus, 
in the year 1600. The name Braz, which had been given to 
him at his baptism, was altered into Affonso by desire of 
the King D. Manuel, for this Prince desired as well to per- 
petuate in the person of the son the memory of his illustrious 
progenitor, as to continue in him the remuneration due to 
snch eminent merits; and of this he gave manifest proofs in 
appointing him captain of a ship of war in the fleet which 
conveyed the Infanta D. Beatriz when she proceeded to be 
betrothed to the Dnke of Savoy, and in being instramental 
in procuring his marriage with one of the most illnstrions 
Ladies whom Portugal honoured. This was D. Maria de 
Noronha, daughter of D. Antonio de Noronha, First Count 
of Linhares, and private Scrivener to the King D. Manoel, 
and of Donna Joanna da Silva, daughter of Diogo da Silva, 
flrst Count of Portalegre ; he also presented him with a 
. pension of three hundred thousand reis. Not only the 
merits which he inherited, but his own as well, rendered him 
worthy even of higher rewards. He was endowed with a 
remarkable pradence, acquired by study of books, and by 
a constant practice of business, on which account the 
King D. Jofto III appointed him Overseer of his Household, 
and herein he was as vigilant for the interests of his Prince 
as he was disinterested in his own private gain. His ability 



xlviii 


TO THE READER. 


manifested itself in a great act of providence, when in the 
year 1569. being at the time President of the Senate of 
Lisbon, he availed himself of all practicable means to prevent 
the calamitons losses that were produced throughout the 
city by the pestilence, which with horrible voracity had as it 
were consumed many thousands of men ; indeed the total 
extermination of such a frightful scourge was entirely due to 
his universal watchfulness. As a recreation from the duties 
which he performed, he constructed in the village of Azeitfto 
a magnificent Quinta, planted with leafy woods and watered 
with winding streams, of whose pristine grandeur some 
remains have been preserved even to the present day. 
When full of years and virtuous deeds, he died at Lisbon in 
the year 1580. and was buried in the Parish Church of St. 
Simon, situate in the Town of Azeitfto. wherein he founded 
two chapels, with the intention that each Chaplain should 
say every week four masses, for his soul, and those of his 
ancestors, his wife, his friends and enemies, and those who 
are undergoing penance in purgatory. He left an only 
daughter, named Dona Joanna de Albuquerque, who mar- 
ried D. Fernando de Castro. He composed — 

* 1 . Gommentarios de Affonso Dalbuquerqne. Capitfto CenJ. 
e Govemador da India. colligidoB por seu filho Affonso Dal- 
buquerque das proprias Cartas, quo elle escrevia ao muito 
poderoso Bey Dom Manoel o primeiro deste nome. em cujo 
tempo govemou a India.’ * Commentaries 'of Affonso Dal- 
boquerque. Captain-General, and Governor of India, collected 
by his son Affonso Dalbuquerque from the original letters 
f^hich he wrote to the all powerful King Dom Manoel. the 
first of this name, in whose time he governed India.’ 

''They are divided into four parts according to the periods 
of his labours. At the end ui written the following pas- 
sage: — 

* These Commentaries of Afonso Dalbuquerque. Captain- 
General. and Governor of India, were print^ in the city of 



TO THE READER. 


xlix 


Lisbon by JoSo de Barreira, Printer to the King, our Master. 
The impression was completed on the eve of St Sebastian’s 
day, the nineteenth of Jauuaiy, in the year fifteen hundred 
and fifty-seven, on which day the Prince D. Bastifio, our 
Master, to whom this book is dedicated, completed the third 
year of his age. Fol. 

''A second* edition was issued in Lisbon, by the same 
printer, in 1576, fol. Translated into the French language 
in Paris by Jofto Marnef, 1579. 

In the Cancionero, collected by Garcia de Bezende, there 
are some verses of AiFonso de Albuquerque, at folios 169, 
170, and 176, by which it appears he was as' well versed in 
Poetry as he was in History. 

* II. Tratado da Antiguidade^ Nobreza, e Descendenoia da 
Familia dos Albuqueiques. MS.’ 

Treatise of the Antiquity, Nobility, and Gen&logy of the 
Family of the Albuquerques. Manuscript. 

This work is mentioned by himself in the Qommentaries, 
Part ly, chap. 50 ; and by the Padre Dom Antonio Gae- 
tano de Sousa^ in the Apparato d Historia Oeral da Oasa 
Beal Portvgueza, p. 38, § 17. 

'' The following writers speak of the author and his work 
with well merited encomiums : — 

Barros, Deeada II da India, lib. z, chap. 8. 

Maffeo, Eerum Indiearum HuAorvB, lib. v, in fine. 

Goes, Chronica del Rey D. Manud, Part III, chap. 80. 

Antonio de Leon,* Bib. Orient, Tit. iti. 

Nicolaus Antonius,* Biblioiheca Biepana, tom. i. Part VI. 

D.« Luis de Salazar De Cast. Bietcria da Caea doe Sylv., 
Part II, lib. vi, chap. 13, § 3, n. 14. 

> Antonio Caetano de Sonsa: Butorica QeneaXogia da'Caea Real Par- 
tugueea deede a Sua Origem ail o prexente, etc., large quarto, Lisbon, 1735. 

* Antonio de Learn Pinello: Epitome de la BibUoiheca Oriental y Occi- 
dental Nautiea, y Oecgrafica,qxkitktto, Madrid, 1629; folio, Madrid, 1737. 

* Nic. Antonins, Bibliotheca Hiepana, folio, Rome, 1672. 

h 



1 


TO THE HEADER. 


Faria,^ Epi/tome das HistorioB Portuguezas^ Part IV, ohap. 18. 

Joao Soarez de Brito, ‘ In Theatro LuritanuB^ lit. a, n. 8. 

Antonio Ferreiro,’ in the Poemas LusUanos^ Siegy 8 ; 

And the Padre Lafitau, Histaire des DBeouvertes et Con- 
quezUs dea Portngaia^ tom. i, p. 521 : ** 11 y parolt un grand 
amour de la verity, line grande moderation, beaucoup de 
management pour la peraonne des ennemis de son P^re, et 
taut de modestie dans le detail des actions de ce Heros, qu’on 
pent dire que le portrait qu'il en fait, bien loin d’etre outre, 
est beaucoup au-dessous de son original.” 

1 Manoel Severim de Faria: Epitome da las Historiaa Poriugueaou, 
quarto, Madrid, 1628. 

* Theatrum Luaitanim Litteratum, aive Bibliotheca Scriptortm omnium 
Luaitanorum^ folio, compiled in 1645, but (?) never printed. 

* Antonio Ferreiro : Poemas Luaitanoa^ quarto, liabon, 1598. 


IK) Tn 


MOST HIGH AND ATJ. POWERFUL LORD, 

THB 

KING D. SEBASTIiO, OUR LORD, 

Afionbo D^lboquebqub. 

In the lifetime of the King D. Joffo the Thirds your grand- 
father^ I dedicated to Your Highness these Commentaries, 
which I have collected from the actual originals written by 
the g^eat Afonso Dalboquerque in the midst lof his adiren- 
tures to the King D. Manuel jour great grandfather. And 
as I perceived. Most Serene Lord, that there was a great 
demand for them (in order that the remembrance of his 
labours should bj no means perish), I determined to reprint 
them, correcting some things which I had written, and 
adding others, being now possessed of more correct infor- 
mation than I then had, which have induced me to under- 
take this work. I was moreover invited to do so, bj a 
conversation which took place in the presence of your 
Highness, wherein when some Fidalgos, who were present, 
were praising certain of the great Captains whom the world 
had produced. Tour Highness rebuked them, saying: — 
'' Wherefore is the need of speaking of Captains when we ' 
have Afonso Dalboquerque in India.^^ Had there been no 
other reason than this to reprint these Commentaries, this 
alonewonld have influenced me to do so, to the end that of such 
high-minded words, spoken by an invincible spirit like that 
of Your Highness, the remembrance might remain to glorify 
yet further the glorious victories which this excellent Cap- 



lii 


AFFONSO DALBOQUERQUE. 


tain gained over the Moors in the conquest of the Kingdoms 
of India. For me to desire in this place to treat of the praises 
he merited and of the many hardships he suffered^ and as 
many others which he overcame with the greatness of his 
mind^ would require another history greater than his own. 
I shall say no more than tell you what a Soldier said who 
always accompanied him in war. This man being very 
old, and staying in the City of Ooa» when he reflected 
upon the disorder of Indian affairs^ went with a stick in his 
hand to the chapel of Afonso Dalhoquerque^ and striking the 
sepulchre wherein he was lying buried^ cried out : — Oh ! 
great Captain, Thou hast done me all the harm thou couldst 
have done, but I cannot deny that thou hast been the 
greatest conqueror, and sufferer of troubles, that the world 
has known : arise thee, for what thou hast gained is like to 
be lost I ** These Commentaries ought not to have the less 
credit and authority from your Highneito because I, who am 
his son, have collected them, than that which those of 
Cesar, writing of himself so many years ago, obtain through- 
out the world, seeing that in this rugged style of mine I 
narrate the truth of what took place. 



TITLES 


or THB 

CHAPTERS CONTAINED IN THIS FIRST PART. 


WHSKBIN IS CONTAINED HOW THB GREAT AFONSO DALBOQUERQUE 
WENT TO INDIA FOR THB FIRST AND SECOND TINES; AND 
WHAT TOOK PLACE IN THE CONQUEST OF THE KINGDOM 
OF ORMUZj UNTIL HE ARRIVED AT CANAROR. • 


CHAPTER 1. 

How he went to India for the first ^e as chief captain of three 
▼esBelB, and airiyed at Cochim, and what further took place 

CHAPTER n. 

How the great Af onao Dalboquerque and FranciBOo Dalboquerque, 
after the darmidiy had an widience with the Jcing upon the 
building of the fortreas, and what passed between them 


1 


6 


CHAPTER Ul. 

How the great Dalboquerque airiyed at ConlSOy and what passed 

with the goyemofs of the land - 8 


CHAPTER IT. 

How the ships from Calient hoye in right of Coullo, and the great 
Afonso Dalboquerque prepared to fight them, and what took 
place thereupon with the g oye mors of the land - 11 


CHAPTER V. 

Of the treaty which the great Afonso made with the goyemors of 
land xeqtecting peace, before his setting out, and the rest that 
took place with the natiye Christiana there, and his setting 
out for Cochim - - - - - 18 


liv 


TITLES OF THE CHAPTERS 


CHAPTER VI. 

How the great Afonao Dalboqueique set out from Cochim to 

Cananor, and what took place till he arrived at Portugal - 16 

CHAPTER Vll. 

How the King, D Manod, sent Tristfio da Cnnha to India in the 
year *6, and Afonao Dalboquerque accompanied him in a 
fleet of fourteen sail, that they might erect the fortreaa of 
<jaootora - - - - - - 19 

CHAPTER Vlll. 

How the chief captain, THstSo da Gunha, despatched the caravd 
to Portugal, and set out from Biziguiche: and what took 
place until he arrived at Mozambique - - - 23 

CHAPTER IX. 

How the chief captain, TristSo da Gunha, from the information 
which the negroes whom Bui Pereira brought gave him, 
determined to go and discover the Idand of S. Lourenzo - 26 

CHAPTER X. 

How the chief captain, TristSo da Gunha, got himsdf ready to go 

and explore the island, and what took place therein - 28 

CHAPTER XI. 

How the chief captain, TristSo da Gunha, returned along the 
coast and all but perished, and what passed with the great 
Afonso Dalboquerque - - - - 31 


CHAPTER XIX. 

How the chief captain, TristSo da Gunha, left Mozambique with 
his fleet, and had an audience with the King of Melinde, and 
thence went to Angoja and destroyed it - - 34 


CHAPTER XIII. 

How the chief captain, TristSo da Gunha, proceeded to Braboa, 

and what passed there - - - - 37 


CHAPTER xiv. 

How the chief captain, TristSo da Gunha, went to attack the city 

of Braboa^ and after its destniction sailed for Qocotora - 41 

CHAPTER XV. 

How the chief captain, TristSo da Gunha, left Braboa, and made 
his coarse direct for the island of ijfocotora, and what hap- 
pened there 


44 



CONTAINED IN THE FIRST PART. 


Iv 


CHAPTER XVI. 

How the chief captain, TristSo da Canha, entered the fortress, and 

what took place when he arriTed there - - - 49 

CHAPTER XYIl. 

Of the message which the chief captain, TristSo da Gnnha, sent 
to the people of the land, and what passed with them, and 
how he finished the fortress of Qocotora, and sailed for India; 
and how the great Afonso Dalboqnerque became chief cap- 
tain of the fieet - - - - - 68 


CHAPTER XVUI. 

How the great Afonso Dalboqoerqne, after TristSo da Canha had 
sailed, made his fieet ready, and sailed with the intention of 
gmng to wait for the Moorish ships whidi came from India to 
the straits, and what happened thereupon - - 66 

CHAPTER XIX. 

• • 

How the great Afonso Dalboquerque, owing to his great need of 
supplies, shaped his course for the Straits of Ormua, and 
amred at Masoate - - 60 


CHAPTER XX. 

Of what the great Afonso Dalboquerque transacted with the 

goremon of the city of Calayate on his arriTal there - 62 

CHAPTER xxi» 

How the great Afonso Dalboquerque left the city of Calayate, 

and went on to Curiate, and took it by force of anns 67 

CHAPTER xxn. 

How the great Afonso Dalboquerque set sail from Curiate and 
went to Maaeate, and what passed there - 72 

CHAPTER xxni. 

How the great Afonso Dalboquerque, by adiice of the captains, 
attadmd the town of Masoate, and destroyed it, and what 
took place there - - - - - 76 


CHAPTER XXIV. 

How the great Afonso Dalboquerque ordered the city of Maaeate 
to be set on fixe, and of the miracle which took place when 
the moaque was destroyed, and how he returned to the ships, 
and sailed away . . 


81 



Ivi 


TITLES OF THE CHAPTERS 


CBAPTBB XXV. 

Of what took place between the great Afonao Dalboqnerqne and 
Jo8o da Nora, and how he aet out from Maacate to the town 
of Soar, and what paaaed with the goremora of the land - 84 

CHAPTER XXVI. 

How the great Afonao Dalboquerqne aent a flag to the mlera of 
Soar, to be aet up on a tower of the fortreaa aa a aignal of 
peace ; and of the manner of ita rec^tion, and what further 
paaaed - - - - - - 88 

CHAPTER XXVII. 

How the great Afonao Dalboquerque aet aail from Soar, and went 

along the coaat direct to Orfa^ and how he took it - 93 

CHAPTER XXVllI. 

How the great Afonao Dalboquerque aet out from OrfaoSo to 
Ormuz, and what paaaed with the captaina when the city 
came in eight ..... lol 

CHAPTER XXIX. 

Of the fleet which the King of Ormuz had in the harbour, and 
how it was arranged, and of the meaaagea which paaaed be- 
tween him and the great Afonao Dalboquerque - - 106 

CHAPTER XXX. 

How the great Afonao Dalboquerque, aedng that the reply waa 
put off, proceeded to attack the fleet which lay in the port of 
Ormuz, and defeated it - - - - 111 

CHAPTER XXXI. 

How the captaina, after the taking of the ahip Aferi, followed up 
thmr Yictoi^, and of the havoc th^ made in the fleet, and 
how the great Afonao l)alboquerque proceeded to attack the 
jetty, where he waa wounded .... 115 

CHAPTER XXXU. 

How the great Afonao Dalboquerque routed the fleet, and 
traveieed the dty, burning and deatrqying all the auburba; 
and how the king aent two Moors in a ferry-boat to sue for 
peace - - - - - 119 

CHAPTER XXXIII. 

Of the reply which the great Afonao Dalboquerque gave to the 
Moora; and how he aent Peru Vas Dorta, factor, and JoSo 
EatSo, and Gaapar Rodriguea, interpreter, to land ^ and of 
what paaaed with the king and hia govemora - - 124 



CONTAINED IN THE FIRST PART. 


Ivii 


CHAPTER XXXIV. 

How the great Afonso Dalboqucrque arranged with the king the 
tribute which was to be paid, and how he demanded space in 
the city to erect a fortress - - - - 128 

CHAPTER XXXV. 

How the King of Ormuz sent to ask of Afonso Dalboqneique a 
flag to be placed on his palace in sign of peace, and what 
was done in the matter .... 132 

CHAPTER XXXVI. 

How the great Afonso Dalboqueique had an audience with the 
king on the jetty, and what passed in these visits, and what 
took place with the sailors in the sea with the dead Moors, 
whose bodies floated on the water - - - 134 

CHAPTER XXXVII. 

How the great Afonso Dalboquerque sent to beg of the king space 
in Ormuz to build a fortress, and what passed thereat, and 

how it was commenced where it now stands - - 138 

* • 

CHAPTER XXXVIII. 

How the great Afonso Dalboquerque made his fleet ready to go 
and take a view of the strait of the Red Sea, and of the reply 
he gave to Rexnordim concerning the tribute which the Am- 
bassador of Xeque Ismael came to demand - - 143 

CHAPTER XXXIX. 

How the King of Ormuz sent word to Afonso Dalboquerque, say- 
ing that he desired to see the Portuguese musketeers fire a 
volley, and how it was done; and how Afonso Didboquerque 
wrote to the Viceroy of India concerning the state of affairs 
in Ormuz, and what took place with the captains - - 146 

CHAPTER XL. 

Of the speech which the great Afonso Dalboquerque made to tUb> 
captains upon the insubordination which th^ evinced; and 
of the complaints they made to him ; and of some words 
that passed with them thereupon ... 149 

CHAPTEB XLl. 

How the captains made another remonstrance to the great Afonso 
Dalboquerque, and idl signed it; and what he did thereupon, 
and what else passed with him ... 152 

CHAFTBR XLIl. 

Of what the great Afonim Dalboquerque did with the masters, 
pilots, and all the otto seamen whom the captains had in- 
cited to mutiny against him - - - - 154 



Iviii 


TITLES OP THE CHAPTERS 


CnAFT£B XLIII. 

Of what the great Afonso Dalboquerqne did with Francisco de 
Tavora on leaving the quarry, and of the conversation he 
held with the captains after coming to land - - 157 

CHAPTER XLIV. 

How four Christians fled from our fleet, and related to Cogeatar 
the disagreements that existed between Afonso Dalboqoerque 
and the captains ; and of the message he sent to him, and of 
the rest that ensued .... igo 

CHAPTER XLV. 

How the great Afonso Dalboquerque, perceiving that Cogeatar 
would not deliver up the men, ordered the oflicers and men 
employed on the work, who were on shore, to be withdrawn, 
and of what else passed with the captains - - 164 

CHAPTER XLVI. 

How Cogeatar sent word to the great Afonso Dalboquerque, ask- 
ing for a safe conduct for the Christians, and how the captains 
sent him a remonstrance urging him not to make war against 
the city, and what further took place with them thereupon - 167 

CHAPTER XLVII. 

How the great Afonso Dalboquerque determined to make war with 
Ormuz ; and how the king's people, who were on guard at 
the watering stations of Turumbaque, were routed by ours - 173 

CHAPTER XLVIIZ. 

How Cogeatar again ordered his people to clear out the pools of 
Turumbaque, and how the people whom he had appointed to 
guard them were discomfited by our men, and of further matters 177 

CHAPTER XLXX. 

Of the message sent by the king to the great Afonso Dalboquer- 
que, begging for peace, and the answer he gave, and what 
passed in the Island of Queixome on proceeding thither for 
water - - - - - - 181 

CHAPTER L. 

Of what passed between the great Afonso Dalboquerque and Jofio 
da Kova, when he would not go to 2Maband6, whither he was 
ordered to go - - - - - 185 

CHAPTER LZ. 

How the great Afonso Dalboquerque returned to the Island of 
Qumome with determination of taking water, and of the rout 
he made of the men whom the king had there for its defence 189 



CONTAINED IN THE FIRST PART. 


lix 


CHAPTBB LU. 

How the great Afonso Dalboquerque ordered Afonso Lopez da 
Costa and Manuel Telez to go and join with Antonio do 
Campo, and attack the Moorish fleet, and how they left him 
and sailed away to India ... - 198 

CHAPTBB LIU. 

How the great Afonso Dalboqueique set out towards (Joootora, 
and having arrived at the island^-sent Francisco de Tavoia to 
Melinde to seek for supplies, and what took place - - 197 

CHAPTBB Liy. 

HoWf on the arrival of Francisco de Tavora at Gape Guardafum, 
the great Afonso Dalboquerque immediatdy despatched Fer- 
nSo Gomez, together with the Moor whom Tristfio da Gunha 
had left in Melinde, to go to the Freste, and how he set off 
towards (Jocotora, and of what further took place - 201 

CHAPTER LV. 

How Manuel Telez, Afonso Lopez da Gosta, and Antonio do 
Gampo, arrived in India and made depositions respdbting* the 
great Afonso Dalboquerque to the Viceroy: and of the in- 
quiry which he ordered to be made in the matter - - 205 

CHAPTBB LVl. 

How the Viceroy, D. Francisco Dahneida, after hearing the cap- 
tains, ordered an information to be laid against the great 
Afonso Dalboquerque, and what took place with them on 
hearing the news which q^une to him from Portugal - 209 

CHAPTBB LYU. 

How the great Afonso Dalboquerque set out from Qoootora to 
Ormuz, and arrived at Galayate, and what took place with 
the captain of the city .... 218 

CHAPTBB LVUI. 

How the great Afonso Dalboquerque proceeded to attack the city 
of Galayate, and destroyed it, and what took place there after- 
wards 217 


CHAPTBB uz. , 

Of the news which the Moor, who brought the present^ related to 
the great Afonso Dalboquerque, concerning India; and how 
he sailed from Galayate to the city of Ormuz, and what took 
place with Gogeatar - - • . - 222 



lx 


TITLES OF CHAPTERS. 


CHAPTER LX. 

How a Moor pat off from land in an atmadia and went on board 
Martim Coelho^a riiip with two letters for the great Afonso 
Dalboqnerqne^ without saying who had sent them, and of 
farther proceedings - .... 225 

CHAPTER LXX. 

How the great Afonso Balboquerque recoimted to the captains 
and principal men of the fleet all that had passed with Coge- 
atar, and of the message he sent him, and of the reply he made 288 

CHAPTER LXn. 

Of the council which the great Afonso Dalboqueique held with 
the captains upon the reply of Gogeatar, and what th^ 
agreed upon, and the message which he sent to the Bnstaies 
by some of their servants, and what further passed - 242 

CHAPTER LXin. 

How the great Afonso Dalboquerque informed Diogo de Melo of 
what news he had received conceming the fleet of Julfar, 
and went toEabande, and fought with the captains of Xeque 
Ismael, and routed them .... 246 

CHAPTER LXIV. 

How Diogo de Melo, who was stationed at the Island of Lara, 
was lost, and how the great Afonso Dalboqueique set out for 
India, and what took place until his arrival at the islaad - 262 


PART I. 


WHIBIIN IS CONTAINID HOW THI OECAT ATONSO DALSOQUBEQUB 
WENT TO INDIA TOE THE TIBST AND SECOND TIKES; AND 
WHAT TOOK PLACE IN THE CONQUEST OP THE KINGDOM 
OP OEMUZ^ UNTIL HE ABETYED AT CANANOB. 


CHAPTER 1. 

How be west to India for the first time as chief captain of time TCSBels, 
and anived at Cochim, and what further took |dace. 

The affidrs of India being in sudi a state that they could 
not well be placed upon a firm footing, nor receive any 
settlement firom the large fleets which the King D. Manoel 
kept sending thither every yeer, on account of the incessant 
war which was made upon the Portuguese who remained in 
Oochim/ and upon the king who was friendly to ns^ by the 
Qamorim^* who had been corrupted by the bribes of the 

* 9deg. fiSmin. N., 76d^. Ifindn. E. See an eailjplaa and descrip- 
tion of this port and f ortw E s in the “Urro do Estado da India Oriental”, 
hy Capitio Pedro Barreto de Besende, a.d. 1646. SloaneMS. in British 
Museum, 197, ff. 811-818. 

9 Zamorim or Samorim, the title which the Indiana give to the King 
of Calicut on the Coast of Malahar. Anciently, a single prince was 
lord of all the coast from Goa to Ckpe Comorim, hut dhsiart Pwysial, 
after embracing the faith of Mahomet, desiring to end his days in peace 
in the city of Medina, dirided Ms estotes namely, the kingdoms of 
Calient, Coddm, Canimor, and CoulSo, among his friends, on oohdition 


C0XMSMTABIE8 OF 


Moorisli merchants from Cairo liying in Calicntj^ which they 
were constantly giving both to him and to his Governors^ — 
being fearful of losing their trade and sailing traffic if oar 
people were established in the land: — ^at this time, and 
to remedy these troubles, the King D. Manoel determined 
to send to India the g^reat Afonso Dalboquerqne and Fran- 
cisco Dalboqoerqae, the son of Jofto Dalboqaerque, his uncle, 
to build a fortress in Cochim for the shelter of the people 
and the storage of the merchandise he might send. And, 
in order to bring this about, he gave order that six vessels 
should be made ready, with soldiers, artillery, and munitions 
of war; for these, with the others which the Admiral was 
about to leave there, as he (Afonso) took them under his com- 
mand, were sufficient. He relied also upon the peace and 
fSrienddiip which Pedralvarez Cabral, at the time of his de- 
parture for these kingdoms, had left established with the 
Kings of CananoT* and Cochim, and upon the presents and 
recommendations which he had sent him through his ambas- 
ladors who had accompanied him. And he gave the chief 
command of three of the ships to Afonso Dalboquerqne, and 
of the other three to Francisco Dalboquerqne. So, when 
all that was heedful for the voyage had been prepared, they 
set sail from the port of Belem* in the early part of April, in 
the year fifteen hundred and three; and, although Afonso 
Dalboquerqne had taken such pains to despatch his affiurs 
that he was able to start first, yet he eaperienced such bad 
weather, and met with so many storms and calms on the 
voyage^ that when he reached Cochim some days had 

that the King of Galicmt shoDld be reoogDised as the chief scmNign, and 
gsre to him the title of <J!am6rim; the ngnification of which is:— 

Supieme Emperor and Clod upon earth.** Dim Baphad BhOmu, 
Yocabnlario Portugues. liaboa, 1720. Sub v. ^bmanm, Samorim, 

* 11 d^. 12 min. K.y 75 d^. iSmin. E. 

* See plan and deacription in P. Barreto deBeaeQde*swor]^ if. 298-802. 

* The Port of Lisbon, cm the north bank of the Tagna and nearer to 
theaea. 



AFONSO DALBOQUIBQUE. 


elapsed since Francisco Dalboqnerqne had arrived with the 
ships of his company and three others which he had met with 
on the way. Now^ since the Qamorim, at the departure of 
the Admiral for these Kingdoms^ had renewed the war with 
the King of Cochim^ and had made himself master of the 
island, in defence of which the Portuguese had suffered 
much trouble and even death, great was the joy and delight 
of all at the arrival of Francisco Dalboquerque. And the 
king went at once to see him, and, after having inquired 
respecting the Kinjg of Portugal, his brother, and respecting 
the voyage just made, gave him an account of his troubles, 
and of the cruel war which the Qamorim had made upon 
him after the departure of the admiral, and of the way in 
which he had made himself master of the island. Francisco 
Dalboqnerqne gave him his recoinmendatiofis on the part of 
the King of Portugal, and bade him be of good cdieer; for he 
hoped in God qnidcly to be avenged of his enemies, the king, 
his lord, having sent both himself and Afonso Dalboqner- 
que, who was waiting behind, with fleet and soldiers to serve 
him in all he ordered. The interview at an end, the king re- 
iiimed to his own house, and Francisco Dalboqnerqne 
proceeded to discuss the business with Diogo Femandea 
Correa, whom the admiral had left as factor, and with Lou- 
renqo Moreno and Alvaro Yaz, who were notaries, and with 
other principal persons who were there, and these gave him 
Account of all that had passed, and said that it was very 
neoessary for the credit of the Portuguese, and for the 
lading of the ships with the leaet trouble, that they dionld 
rid the Island of Cochim of certain Caimais^ (who are prin- 
cipal lords of the kingdom), whom the Qamorim had in it 
with men for its defence. 

This being agreed upon, Franoisoo Dalboqnerqne made 

* JTaMud, a title of xiuik anumgit the Naii% aad used hj the inferior 
ehuues when addieaungihem, as— My lord, and the like.— fT. S. Wilton^ 
Olomary uf... Ttnm ...of BfUM India. London, ISfiS. 

bS 



4 


comnHTABUs or 


ready with all his eoldien, and those that were in Coohim, 
as wdl as certain Naires^ of the king, , and on the following 
day before dawn set ont in the boats y>araoa* and earaaeilat^ 
to fight the Caimais, who were nnooncemed at what had 
taken place, and he attacked them so suddenly that he pnt 
them to flight. And having routed them, he went on pur- 
suing them till he drove them ont of the island, jrilling 
many Naires and two Caimais. Having thus freed the 
island of them, he withdrew his men to the boats, and re- 
embarked without meeting any resistanoa And, on his 
arrival at Coohim, the king and his own people received 
him with great honour, praising him very much for what 
he had done. There, too, he found Afonso Dalboqnerqne, 
who had that day arrived in the morning with the ships of 
his company, and all the people on board safe and sound, 
and to whom the King of Goehim had already given an 
account of his miafortnnes. And seeing that he always 
kept his spies that he might know his enemW movements, 
he was immediately mformed that the Naires, who had fled 
from the attack made by Frandsco Dalboqnerqne, had shnt 
themselves np in the Island of Bepelim, and were making 
interest with the lord of it And because the King of 
Cochim was mnch alarmed at the power of this Lord of 
Bepelim, as this lord was always opposed to him, and he 
himself could not be entirely safe if he made a settlement in 
that island, he informed Afonso and Franoiaco Dalboqner- 
qne of it, and begged them very greatly that they would be 
pleased to drive him thence. Accordingly, as they intended 
to do nothing except the king^s pleasure, that they might 

' jr<gfar, oonunonty jyisjr, or JITayir. Thenaawof tharuUngOMliBiii 
Malabar, prafeaang to bo /Shidnu, but beating anna and enroiaing 
■overeignty.— Ifilfoa. 

* Faiio, a auuU boat used for and other p ni poa e s in India.— 

Blutiau. 

* Gaiavda, a round boat with aaib of lateen, of about two handred 
tons bmden.— fllMlRm. 



ArONBO DALBOQnSBQnX. 


5 


re(&on tiiie more upon his assistance as regarded the con- 
stmction of the fortress, which they were about to disooss 
with him, they made ready with five hundred Portuguese, 
and, on the following day before dawn, set out in the boats 
along the river banks to attack the island. And, although 
at first when they entered .they met with some resistance 
from a force of two thousand Naires and many gunboats, 
whidi the Qamorim had sent to reinforce it, our people 
engaged them with such vigour, that they overcame them, 
and put them to fiight, killing the greater number of the 
Naires, and setting fire to the place. Having gained the 
victory, thqr rotumed to Cochim, where they were well 
received by the king, who gave them great thanks for the 
service they had rendered him in this affiur. In this com- 
pany there were also Duarte Pacheco and Pedro Dataide. 


CHAPTER II. 

Ilow Um great Afouao Dalboquecqoe and FTandaco Dalboq,nerqae^ after 
thirikiniiieh, had an audience with the king upon the bniUUng of 
the fortnM, and what pained between them. 

These victories having been obtained, as well as others 
which our people gained against the sddiers of the Qamorim, 
and the S^g of Cochim having been reiiutated in all that 
th^ had taken from him, the great Afonso Dalboqnerqne 
and Frandsco Dalboqnerq,ne determined that, before they 
tamed their attention to lading the ships, they would speak 
with the king req>ecting the fortress, which, according to 
their orders, thq^ had to erect in Cochim. And both of 
them told him that the chic^ reason why the Portuguese 
who remained there for his service had suffered so many 
troubles, wan, and deaths, was that they had not a strong- 
hold wherein they might be safe fiwm the vexations which 
the Moon of the land every day inflicted upon them, and 


6 


COHKKNTABUS OF 


from which he was in no way able to protect them; and also 
whereby they might be able to withstand the power of the 
Qamorim, and that by what had hitherto taken place, his 
Royal Highness conld clearly perceive that they stood in 
great need of it And the King D. Manoel, his lord, con- 
fiding in his friendship, and in what was due to his service, 
had sent to beg him that he would be pleased to grant a 
site dose by the river, in which they might construct a 
stronghold for the safety of the Portuguese, who remained 
there, and for the safe stowing of the merchandise which 
might be sent from Portugal, for thereby his estate would 
be safer. The king heard this demand, and, although 
there were on the ‘part of the governors and lords of the 
land, to whom he communicated the business, some obstades 
against the granting it, — ^for th^ had been induced to op- 
pose it by the Moorish merchants of the land, by means of 
bribes which they had given them, because they were un- 
willing that we should make « settlement in it, — yet to 
establish his estate the more safely, and to preserve the 
friendship of the King of Portugal, and also to keep the 
great profit which accrued to him from this commerce, he 
put aside all the hinderers, and was pleased to grant a site 
for the building of the fortress, where it now stands : and 
this was the first which was made in India. That the work 
might be quickly finidied, the two Dalboqnerques divided 
the labour of it between them, so as to shorten the time, 
and each commenced to erect the part which .feU to his 
diare. As they had no means of working stone and mortar, 
they desired the king to order wood to be given them> 
whidi he sent for at once in great abundance. The build- 
ing was begun with some large palisades fiOed in with 
earth. And because Afonso Dalboqnerque had to go to 
Goul&o* to take in a cargo of spices, according to the orders 

' See P. Beneto de Beaende for j^an aad deeaription of this port and 



AFONSO DALBOQUEBQUE. 


7 


which he had from the King D. Manoel^ that as soon as 
he arrived in India he should take cargo in Cochim to 
assist CoulftOj whither he had already despatched two ships 
of his company^ he laboured day and night with all his men 
in such a manner^ that in a short time he completed his 
share of the fortress. Thenceforth, some differences arose 
between them respecting their rivalry at the work. Afonso 
Dalboquerque, on excuse of being annoyed with his cousin^ 
began to be chary of his conversation with him, and on 
several occasions setit to tell him that, since the fortress was 
finished on his side, he begged he would graciously appoint 
some person to stay in it as captain until the king’s wishes 
were known. Francisco Dalboquerque, according to his 
won<^ would not appoint anyone. Afonso Dalboquerque, 
seeing these jealousies, which his cousin desired to make 
with him, forgetting that the King D. Manoel haH given 
orders to both that they should make this fortress, ordered 
Padre Fr. Bodrigo, of the Order of St. Dominic, to be sent 
for, and told him that he had constantly sent to beg Fran- 
cisco Dalboquerque to come to some mutual arrangement 
how it *would be best to leave the fortress, and that he 
would never come to any terms about it, but rather chose 
to introduce speeches of little value in the present state of 
affairs, and that he himself wanted to go to Coul&o to load 
his ships ; for he had sent thither two ships of his squad- 
ron, and it was necessary to relieve the place ; for he had 
advice that many ships had passed bound for Ghoromandel, 
and that he, as far as regarded his portion of the labour 
which he had expended upon the fortress, was anxious to 
cause a Mass to be celebrated, and then set out to load his 
ships, and that Francisco Dalboqnerque might do as he 

fortreBi ff. 819-8E8. A fortslless de Coolam esta sits ns Costa Biana 
do huma piquena Bahia No destreito do R^yno de Tiatanoor Em Altars 
de None graos da bands do Norte Yinte e linqno Legoas de Cochim 
peraoSuL** 



8 


COmBHTABIM OF 


pleased, and ihat it was bis especial desire that he would 
undertake the Mass himsdf. Fr. Rodrigo was much 
troubled that differences should exist between men so 
honourable and so nearly related, and ihat, too, in a land 
wherein the a£Eairs of Portugal had not yet been firmly 
established. So he went with Afonso Dalboqnerqne to the 
fortress and celebrated Mass ; and, at the dose of the ser- 
vice, they walked in procession throngh it, and called it the 
" Convent of Christ*^ becanse it was undertaken in a land 
annexed to the magistrate of these kingdoms and the first 
fortress which had been made in those parts. Francisoo 
Dalboqnerqne, in order not to agree with him*as regarded 
the share he had in the labonr, called it "Alboqnerqne*^ 
and appointed as captain and officers whom he chose, whereat 
Afonso Dalboqnerqne felt mnoh discontent, bnt pnt np with 
eveiything that it might not oome to the knowledge of the 
Moors that there were differences between them. So, 
having taken his leave of the king^ he made ready to leave 
and take in his carga 


CHAPTER m. 

Bow the great Balboqaerqne arrived at Coollo^ and what pamed with 
the goveraors of the land. 

When the great Afonso Dalboqnerqne was jnst ready to 
set ont, n pardo arrived from ConlAo, and in it a servant of 
Antonio de Si, the fiictor, with a letter firom him, wherein 
he said that he had oome on a good errand, for there was 
certain news that thirty diips had left Calient bound for 
ChoromandeL 

Now since Afonso Dalboqnerqne had sent two ships on 
before him to get his cargo ready, as I have said, he was 
not at all pleased at this news, and hastened his departore 
the more, and in a short time arrived at Conltki, where he 



AI0H80 DALBOQDIBQUI. 


9 


was yeiy well received by the goveraors of (ihe land, and by 
the Nambeadarim,* who is the principal governor. And 
becanse the King had gone into the interior of the country 
to war, which he was waging with the King of Xarsinga,* 
th^ sent him the news immediately by means of men whom 
they had in relays, and ina few days he was informed of their 
arrival. The king, from his desire of onr friendship, wrote 
to the Nambeadarim, and the mlers of the city, giving great 
thanks for the hononr and hospitality which they had shown 
to Afonso Dalboqnerqne, and commanded them to do all that 
he adced and required, and to try all th^ could to induce 
him to establish a trade there. Although the g^emors, 
owing to tile inducements and bribes of the ^iamorim, were 
greatly opposed to this establishment^ which the King 
widied onr people to make in the land, yet he was so much 
feared that, without showing their discontent, they per- 
formed everything with more faithfulness than Afonso 
Dalboqnerqne had expected of them; and he forthwith 
established a feotoiy house, with mndi menhandise, and 
an other tilings neoessaiy to the quick despatch of the ships, 
whenever they came there to take in cargo. The peace 
having then been made, and sworn to by tiie King and his 
governors, Afonso Dalboqnerqne began to load his ships 
with pepper, at the price and weight whidi the admiral had 
fixed at Ooohim. When the Qamorim heard of this new 
friendship and trade, which the King of CSonlfto desired to 
hold with the Portuguese^ in order to hinder the good effect 
of this bnsineBS, he sent his ambsMsadors to him, saying 
that he must beware what he wi« about, for the Portuguese 
were a very bad iwce, and if he admitted them into his land 
they would rise up against him. And he added that this 

* Namkud&rit commonly pnmoanoed and written Wamhuri or itTom- 
leorf , a Bmlunaa of the highest order in lialahar, also the "■»»f of the 
tribe or caste.— IFtZwa. 

* jforafsgeA, 20 deg. 41 min. V., 85 deg. 4 min. £. 



10 


COXMBNTABIIS OB 


was the chief reason which had moved him to insist so 
strongly npon driving them out of India. And on this 
behalf he also went on to represent to him many other 
things to the same purpose^ and sent large presents to the 
governors of the land^ begging them to influence the King 
against giving a cargo to the Portuguese^ or receiving them 
in his port. Bat all these artifices which the Qamorim used, 
in order to withstand our people, now that he could not 
effect anything by force of arms, because the land was very 
far from his, availed him nothing : for the King of Coulflo 
was a man of such truthfolness that, in spite of all these 
arguments which the Qamorim advanced, he kept his word, 
and established his friendship with Afonso Dalboquerqne. 
And he answered the Qamorim that he had received no 
injury or insult from the Portuguese, but rather was con- 
vinced that they were men of their word, and that unless it 
was their own fauit, he would not withdraw from what he 
agreed upon. The Qamorim was not pleased at this reply, 
and was deeply annoyed that he was unable to destroy the 
King of Coulfto, or hinder the Portuguese from carrying the 
pepper which was there from Cochim to Coulfto, because all 
the inhabitants of the interior were heathen who were 
desirous of peace and friendship with our people. And m 
Calient all were foreign Moors who endeavoured to drive us 
from India, from the fear they had that we should be masters 
of it, and they be ousted from their trade. When Afonso 
Dalboquerqne knew how the Qamorim was tiying to induce 
the King of Coulfto to hinder our people from settling in the 
land, he determined from that time forward to trade more 
familiarly with the latter, and transact somewhat more libe- 
rally the trading of the merchandise, although in this respect 
he might exceed in some measure the. orders which the King 
had given him, and this was the reason such confidence 
sprang up between our people and those of the conntiy, that 
they might have all been taken for native Portuguese. The 



AIOMSO DAIiBOQVIBQVI. 


11 


chief caose of this good fellowship was the absence of Moors 
in the land who conld endeavour to procnre dissension 
between ns and the heathen, as they had done in Cidiont. 

At the time when Afonso Dalboqnerqne arrived at Conifto 
it was a very large city, peopled with heathen, with not a 
single native Moor in it, nor any foreig^ner except the 
brother of Gherinamercar of Oochim, who had gone thither 
just lately to reside. This city was a great seaport of 
merchants, and anciently had in it many merchants stopping 
there from all parts of Indian principally from l^daooa. 
And as it was a port sheltered from the wind on every side, 
the ships which go to India, as well as those which passed 
the Island of Geilio' and Ghale made their entrepdt there. 
In those days the Island of Geilflo was subject to it, and paid 
tribute to it, and it possessed all the land from GonlSo to 
Ghale, which is about sixty leagues, and the distance from 
GonlSo to the Island of GeilSo is eighty leagues. The King 
of GonlSo was a very honest man, and very gallant, and in 
the war which he carried on with the King of Narsinga, 
who had many soldiers, both horse and foot, he attacked 
him with sixty thousand archers and overcame him. Besides 
tbe Nambeadaiim, who was the chief governor, of the land, 
there were in the city thirfy-six principal men who governed 
it, so that it was the best ruled city at that time in those 
parts. 


GHAFTKB IV. 

Bow tlM lUps from Calient hove in aiglit of Oonllo^ aad the great 
Afonao ])albaq.neiqnopcegaied to tight them, and what took plaoe 
theceiq^ with the goranion of the land. 

At Ibis time, when tiie great Afonso Dalboqnerqne was 
taking in his cargo, as abovesaid, the ships from Galiont 
arrived in sight of ours, and they were in all thirty*nine sail, 

^ Ceglon. See P. Barnto, fw plan of tUa falaiid, ff. MS, MS. 



12 


C0MMSNTABI18 Off 


twentj-eiglifc from Calient^ and the rest from Coohim and 
Oananor. And as Afonso Dalboquerqne was desirons of 
distressing the ^^orim as mneh as possible^ to be avenged 
on himj he made up his mind to go and attack them> some- 
what against the opinion of Antonio de Sd and the people 
in the fleets and^ not to lose anj time^ he slipped his cableSj 
and set sail. When the Moors saw our ships putting off and 
coming to challenge them, they sent a pardo, to beg for 
peace. In the meanwhilej however^ they chained their 
ships in groups of five each^ and determined to fight us. 
And because the wind dropped^ and Afonso de Alboquerqne 
feared that the ships would avail themselves at night of the 
land breeze to stand out to sea^ and get away without his 
wreaking his vengeance upon them^ he sent Antfto Garcia 
in his ship^ which was small and a quick sailer^ to take up 
a similar position. The Moors were made timid by this 
arrangement^ and held another council^ and all of them at 
night stood in to the port of Coulfto^ because our ships were 
a little on one side of it^ at the mouth of a river. When 
Afonso Dalboquerqne saw that the ships desired to make for 
the land^ he sent word to the Nambeadarim and to the 
governors of the land^ that those ships were from the 
Qlamorim^ chief enemy of the King of Portugal his lord^ 
and begged they would of their favour order them to be 
given up to him ; for if this were not done^ he deternuned 
to enter the port and bum them all^ and go away without 
taking in any cargo theroj or making any treaty of peace 
with them. The governors replied that they had written to 
the king^ giving him an account of the affiuTj and the reply 
would not be delayed many days : and they begged him 
graciously^ since the ships were sheltered in the port, whence 
they could not depart without permission, to await the 
king’s message. Afonso Dalboquerque told them he was 
willing to do as they desired, provided they gave orders 
that the ship’s sails should be taken away, to prevent their 
escaping at night. 



AFONSO DALBOQUERQUfS. 


13 


This having been agreed upon^ the Nambeadarim sent 
immediately to lay hold of the captains, masters, and pilots, 
and take bail for their good behavionr. A few days after- 
wards the message of the king to the Nambeadarim arrived, 
wherein he ordered that if the ships were willing to show 
obedience to the city governors, and discharge their mer- 
chandise there, the governors were to beg of Afonso Dalbo- 
querqae on his part not to injure them, for it was sufficient 
punishment that they could not leave the port without 
permission. Afonso Dalboquerque replied that it was his 
determination to bum them, and put all the Moors of Calicut 
to the sword, in revenge for the treason they had committed 
against the Portuguese, but since the king had reasons for 
not chastising them, he would not do anything except 
what he ordered. The governors sent immediately to dis- 
charge the ships of their freight, and there thhy remained 
until Afonso Dalboquerque left. And because he had 
been informed that some Moors had purchased much 
pepper in the interior, to evade the standard weight of 
CoulfiOj as long as he was there he made all the ships 
that passed, whether friendly or hostile, even if th^ sailed 
under the flafi; or papers of the admiral, put in to the 
port of Coulfto, where they were searched by the governors 
of the land, who took from them whatever s](lioes they carried, 
and sent it to the ffictoxy where onr people and the natives 
traded. 

CHAPTBE V. 

Of the treaty which the great Afonio made with the gofemoni of the 
land fespeeting peace, before hia aettfang out, and the rest that took 
place with the nalimChriatiaaa there, and hiaaetdiig oat for Codiim. 

IVlien all these afbirs had been set in order, the great 
Afonso Dalboquerque thought fit to renew the treaty of 
peace which be had ' established with the governors, and 



14 


COKMENTABIKS OF 


went on shore ; and, speaking with them in presence of the 
factor, Antonio de Sa, and the other Portngnese who were 
there with him, told them, that in the agreement of peace 
which they had made, it was arranged that the civil and 
criminal jurisdiction shonld be nnder the control of the 
native Christians, as it had always been hitherto; and that, 
therefore, before his departnre he was desirons of leaving 
this so settled that after he was g^ne no differences shonld 
arise between one side and the other; and also that he 
might give an account of his condnct to the king his lord, 
as to the manner in which their affairs in that kingdom were 
settled ; and that he earnestly desired and besought them 
that they would hold to this for good, because the person 
whom he shonld entrust with this office would be required 
at dl times to do what the King of Goulfto might order. 
The governors told him that they agreed to it, and they 
would acquaint the king of it wh^n he arrived : and that he 
conld entrust the office to wbom he pleased, for all would 
ob^ him. Afonso Dalboqnerqne forthwith confirmed the 
jurisdiction before them all to the factor, Antopio de St, and 
commanded him to act in all things conformably to the 
counsel and opinion of the native Christians, and so not 
exceed the order whereby thqr had been governed of old. 
And all were pleased at the choice of Antonio de Sa, to 
whom he especially recommended the provision due to the 
Chnrch. And the Christians of the land had to take care 
to govern and rule the church, which was called ** Our Lady 
of 'ilotef*. The native Christians said that ' two saints, 
who were buried there in two chapels, had made it in a 
miraeulons manner. There were three altars, on which 
stood three crosses, the centre one of gold, the other two 
of silver. The Christians of the place had destined one of 
them for the King D. ICanod, and wishing to send the 
golden one, Afonso Dalboqnerqne told them he wonld only 
take a silver one, as a sign that there were Christians in 



AFONSO DALBOQUEBQUE. 


15 


that land who worshipped the Gross whereon onr Lord 
Jesus Christ had suffered; for this was (as it were) the gold 
wherewith the King of Portugal would be most pleased; and 
when he arrived in Portugal the king should send them 
many ornaments for their churchy as was the usual custom 
between Christians. They were highly delighted at this, 
and desired Afonso Dalboquerque to give them a picture of 
Saint James^ and a bellj which he gave them immediately. 
And because it was necessary to leave there some person 
who might educate them in the rites of our Holy Faith, he 
desired Father Fr. Bodrigo, of the Order of St. Dominic, who 
had accompanied him, to remain there, and he consented, 
for the service of God. And he took such care during the 
days that he was there, that, with his teaching and good 
example, he converted many heathen to the faith of Jesus 
Christ, and baptised many Christians thirty an^ foijby years 
of age, as they did not remember whether they had ever 
been baptised or not. When all these things had been 
settled, the native Christians qame to Afonso Dalboquerque 
and told him that, as he was desirous of confirming to them 
their ancient customs, they begged him that he would gra- 
ciously preserve for them another custom, to wit, that the Chris- 
tians who had the management of the church, also should 
have in their keeping the seal and standai^-weight of the 
city, which privilege the King of Conlfto had taken from them 
for the fault and negligence of one of their number. And that 
these things might remain in the power of the Christians as 
heretofore, they relied much on his authority that he would 
speak to the Nambeadarin and the governors in order that 
they might regain possession of them, for the fault for which 
they had been deprived of them was of one man and not of all. 
Afonso Dalhoquei^jne replied that what they requested had 
not entered into the treaty of peace, and the time was too 
diort to begin new requests, for he was already on the 
point of sailing ; but he would leave word with Antonio de 



16 


COMMENTARIES OF 


SRj who was remaining behind as factor^ that^ when the 
King of Conldo returned from the war^ he should speak 
with him on the subject^ and beg it of him on the part of 
the King of Portugal. With this reply they were quite 
content^ and he took his leave of them and of the go- 
vernors of the land^ and went on board. And he lefb 
them on the 12th of January^ in the year 1504^ and steered 
direct to Gochim to meet Francisco Dalboquerqne^ that they 
might set out both together for Portugal according to the 
orders of the King, D. Manoel. And when he arrived at 
Gochim he did not find him, nor any message about his 
future movements. So he provided the fortress with gun- 
powder, arms, and munitions of war, such as seemed to him 
necessary to fulfil his duty, and left there two earavelaa, and 
the ship Conception, all well armed. And because some of 
the soldiers whom Francisco Dalboquerque had placed there 
to garrison the fortress were detained by force and against 
their will, he ordered them to be xemoved, and lefb others 
who of their own accord were willing to remain. And 
when this was done, he took leave of them fdl and set sail. 


GHAPTBR VI. 

How the great Afonso Dalboquerque set out from Codiim to CanaaoTy 
and what took place tiU he arrived at Portugal. 

When the great Afonso Dalboquerque had his ships 
already prepared, and had embarked to sail for Portugal, 
the factor came on board and told him that Francisco Dal- 
boquerque had gone away to Gananor without taking any 
commodities, although he had frequently besought him to 
take some, for he had some ready within the fortress, and 
he begged Afonso earnestly that he would be pleased to 
perform this service for the king and take the commodities 
to Gananor, as he was to meet Francisco Dalboqnerquo 



AFONSO DALBOQUEBQUB. 


17 


there. To serve the king, Afonso Dalboquerque, although 
his ships were very much overburdened with cargo, took in 
all the cloves and cinnamon which the factor sent him ; and 
leaving port, put in at Calicut, where he found Francisco 
Dalboquerque treating for peace ; but without coming to 
any settlement, they set out in company and went away to 
Cananor, where Afonso Dalboquerque transferred to him 
all the cloves and cinnamon he carried. And because 
Francisco Dalboquerque had to complete the lading of the 
ships, and was getting on rather slowly, though the King 
D. Manoel had given orders that they should keep toge- 
ther, yet all the officers of the factory agreed that Afonso 
Dalboquerque should wait till the 20th of January, and, after 
that time was passed, should sail at once. When the 
25th day of the month had come, and Afonso Dalboquerque 
saw that Francisco was not hastening the lading of his 
ships, he made up his mind to sail, and to w*ait ho longer. 
Respecting the course he was to take there were many 
advices and opinions, but last of all they agreed that he 
should steer his course direct to MoQambique ; and because 
that course was not very much frequented at that time, 
Afonso Dalboquerque carried with him a Moorish pilot from 
Cananor — against the opinion of all, who said that that Moor 
would bring misfortune upon him — but •the Moor was so 
well acquainted with his trade, and knew the passage so 
well, that he carried him direct to Moqanlbique by a fair 
coarse without any accident, and there left him, receiving 
fifty cruzado^ for his trouble. Then, without making any 
stoppage, he shaped his coarse direct for the Cape of Good 
Hope. And because Femfto Martinz Dalmada ran very 
short of water, they put in for water at S. Bras, and re- 
mained there for two days, working night and day all the 

' Cruzado : a silver coin (formerly gold), now equivalent to 480 reis, 
or about two shillings English money, but probably worth much more 
relatively in the time of Dalboquerque. 



18 


COMMBNTABIBS OF 


time. While engaged on this business, they lost the boat 
of Afonso Dalboquerqae, for it was utterly decayed. And 
there they found a letter, sealed up, and wrapped in a 
piece of waxed cloth, fastened upon a post^ which stated 
that Antonio de Saldanha and the Taforia} and the ship 
from Setubd, had arrived there in the month of Octo- 
ber. As soon as his ships had taken in water, Afonso 
Dalboquerque, set sail, and shaped his course for the 
current of the Cape of Good Hope, and having fair weather, 
doubled it on the 1st day of May. When they had doubled 
the Cape, at the advice of the pilots they kept on their 
course till they were in ten degrees north latitude ; and 
here they experienced g^eat calms, so that some of the 
men fell iU. On the morning of St. John^s Day they sighted 
Cape Darca, which is between the shallows of Arguim and 
Cenagud ; and because Afonso Dalboqnerque’s ship leaked 
very much, he determined, as he was in such proximity, to 
go in search of Cape Yerde Island, and there refit his ships 
with what was required, for that was the nearest place. 
And, although the winds were contraiy at this season. 
Our Lord so helped them that they sighted the island. 
And having run aground, the main-yard of Afonso Dalbo- 
querque's ship was broken and the mainsail tom down, for 
they were beating up against ihe wind to catch sight of the 
island, and he anchored with foresail only flying, in the port 
of the beach of Santa Mkria, with the other two ships of his 
fleet, all being now very deficient in cables, sails, and all 
other necessaries required for so lonjg a voyage. For had Our 
Lord not miraculously carried them thither (as this was not 
the true navigation they had to make), they would have 
been swidlowed up by the sea. So they were there for 
three days, and having repaired the ships in all that was 
wanted, and taken water and provisions for their voyage, 

‘ A kind of large boat used in India for transport and carriage of 
horses. 



AFONSO DALBOQUBBQUS. 


19 


they started for Portugal, and with favourable breezes^ 
without touching at any other place, they arrived at Lisbon 
at the end of July in the said year 1504, where Afonso 
Dalboquerque was very well received by the King Dom 
Manoel, who paid him much honour and entertainment, 
evincing his great pleasure at the good success that had 
attended the voyage, and at the completion of the fortress 
of Cochim. 

Francisco Dalboquerque, who stayed behind in Gananor 
loading his ships, as I have related, sailed on the 5th of 
February, and was lost on the way home with the other 
two ships under his command, without any one ever know- 
ing where or how they were lost. 


CHAPTER VII. 

How the king, D. Manoel, sent TristSo da Cunha to India in the year 
*6, and Afonso Dalboquerque accompanied him in a fleet of four- 
teen sail, that they might erect the fortress of Qaeotora.* 

The great Afonso Dalboquerque having arrived at Por- 
tugal in July 1504, as I have said, and having informed the 
King D. Manoel of the state of afiairs in India, how it was 
imperative that arrangements should be made to prevent 
the Moors, after the sailing of the ships to this kingdom, 
from again becoming lords of the coast of Malabar, and — 
being encouraged by the Qamoiim — ^from continuidly causing 
great trouble to the Portuguese and the Kings of Cochim 
and Gananor who wore friendly towards us, the king con- 
sulted with his council upon this business, and there were 
different ideas upon the subject. But at last he agreed to 
send a governor to remain for three years in India, with 
soldiers and armaments needful for the alleviation of the 


^ Soeotora, 12 deg. SOmin. N., 68 deg. 45 min. E. 




20 


COMMENTARIES OF 


troubles our people were suffering. And as lie had confi- 
dence in Tristfto da Cunh^ the elder, that he would seire 
him well in this matter, he determined to send him there as 
goyemor. But when he and his fleet were ready to sail, in 
the year 1505, he fell ill with giddiness in the head, whereby 
he finally became blind. And when the king heard of this 
sudden accident, knowing that it was necessary at once to 
send snccaur to India that year, to encourage our people 
who remained there, he sent for D. Francisco Dalmeida to 
Santarem^ to go in the fleet, and after arriving in India to 
assume the title of Viceroy. So, seeing that the fleet was 
now prepared in everything necessaiy, he went away at once. 
And the following year, 1506, he sent Tristfto da Cunha, 
who was now well and restored to sight, with a fleet of four- 
teen sail, to further the business yet more, under orders that, 
in case he could not reach India that year, he should go into 
winter quarters in the island of Qacotorft, and make there a 
fortress for the Christians, who, as he was informed, dwelt 
tiberein, making an arrangement thereby that the fleet, 
which he had determined to send to the coast of Arabia and 
to Gape Comorim to put a stop to the sailing of the fleets 
which came from India to the straits with spices, should 
have there a sure harbour to winter in. And as the 
King, D. Manoel, saw that Afonso Dalboquerque, in his 
voyage to India in the year ^3, as has been narrated, had 
served him well and had spirit and prudence for governing, 
he sent him in the company of Tristfto da Cunhla to remain 
on that coast as chief captain over six ships and four hun- 
dred men. And he gave him secret instructions that on 
the expiration of three years be was to be Governor of India, 
and the Viceroy, Dom Francisco Dalmeida, was to return to 
Portugal; and being at the time in Abrantes,^ lest he should 
die of plague in the city of Lisbon, he sent him a flag of white 

1 In EBtremaduia, Portugal, 89 deg. 14 min. N., 8 deg 40 min. W. 

* Alao in Estremadura, 39 deg. 29 min. N., 8 deg. 11 min. W. 



AFONSO DALBOQUERQUE. 


21 


satin, with a twisted silk fringe^ crimson and white^ having 
a cross of Christus in the centroj of crimson satin, which he 
took back with him to Portugal^ as 1 shall mention by-and- 
bye. On the completion of all these arrangements^ as soon 
as Tristfto da Cunha had made his fleet ready at Belem^ 
which cost him great labour, owing to the prevalence of the 
plague in the city and the paucity of men to carry with 
him, he started on the morning of the 5th of April, and 
sailed at once straight over the bar with all his fleet, 
leaving Afonso Dalboquerque behind, who remained at 
Belem in the ship dime, of which, he held the captain- 
ship, waiting for a pilot whom he had sent for from 
the king’s officers, for his own pilot, Jofto de Solis, had 
fled into Castile two days back for murdering his wife. 
But when he saw that they would not send him a pilot, 
trusting to his own great experience in sea matters, 'and to 
Diogo Fernandez Fiteira, master of his ship, whoha,d already 
made two voyages to India, and also to that which Trist&o da 
Cunha told him, namely, that he would give him the best 
pilot there was in the fleet, except the chief pilot, he made 
up his mind not to wait any longer, and gathered together 
some people who remained on shore out of the other ships, 
whom the captains were unwilling to take on board as they 
came from Lisbon, and set sail the following day, the 6th 
of the month.. And so with much delay he reached the 
chief .captain, who was looking out for him, and after 
saluting him he told him that he had brought some people 
whom the captains had left on shore, and he begged him 
graciously to order their distribution throughout the ships, 
according to the arrangements agreed upon, for some had 
died, and his own company was so displeased that he was 
at his wits’ end to know what to do, and he had ventured 
upon bringing them, out of the need there would some day 
arise for them in those parts whither they were proceeding. 
The chief* captain answered that if he were hampered by 



22 


COHHENTABIES OF 


them, why had he brought them on? And he wonld not give 
orders for their distribution, whereat Afonso Dalboquerque 
became very mnch displeased. And on their arrival at 
Bizigniche, he sent him a list of the people, who they yrere, 
by Pero Yaz Dorta, who sailed as factor of his fleet, begging 
him earnestly that he wonld order the captains to take 
them, as he had no more supplies than were suffiment for his 
own men. And he begged that he wonld supply him with 
the pilot whom he had promised him before they left Belem, 
for he had not brought one, neither had the king^s officers 
supplied him with one. The chief captain replied that he 
was to send and put the people with their baggage on land, 
and then he wonld dispose them as it seemed best to him ; 
and as to the pilot he had none, nor could he take one from 
the other ships to give him. Afonso Dalboqnerqne, being 
amused at this answer, gave orders to set the people on 
shore, and that Pero Yaz Dorta should inform the chief cap- 
tain that among the people were some Fidalgos and persons 
of repnte, and he did not think it fair to mingle them with 
the others and pnt them on shore, for he ought forthwith 
to see that thqr were distributed throughout the other 
ships. The chief captain dissembled with him and made 
no reply. And because during the days they remained 
there not a single person died nor fell sick in the whole 
fleet, the chief captain, owing to the frequent importnnify of 
Afonso Dalboqnerqne, ordered that fhe persons who were 
in g^od health should be distributed throughout the ships, 
and that the sick should embark in the caravda that he 
had despatched for Portugal, which the king, Dn. Manoel, 
had sent in their company to bring back news of their 
wel&re, for he had great fear of the great plague wherewith 
the fleet was attacked. 



AFONSO DALBOQUEBQUE. 


23 


CHAPTER VIII. 

How the chief captain, TristSo da Cunha, despatched the caravel to Por- 
tugal, and set out from Biziguiche : and what took place until he 
arrived at Mozambique. 

The chief captain^ TristSLo da Gunha^ being ready with his 
fleet to set sail from the port of BiziguichOj despatched the 
captain of the ca/ravela, and wrote by him to the king, con- 
cerning the state all were in^ and how on their arrival there 
the Lord had been pleased to stay the plague. The caravela 
having sailed^ all the ships stood out to double the Cape of 
St. Augustine^ but as it was now late in the season^ and the 
winds contrary^ and as they had to delay because of the 
chief captain^s ship, which was a bad sailer^ they were 
unable to double the Gape^ and tacked again towaifds Guind^ 
wherein much time was spent. While they were making 
this latter run^ so severe a storm broke over the fleet that 
the ships parted company^ one from the other^ and two days 
after collected together again^ and shaped their course for 
St. Augustine^s^ all except the ship of Job Queimado^ which 
was not to be seen. And they kept on their course^ keeping 
back very often for the chief captain^s ship. When Afonso 
Dalboquerque saw that time was wasted in waiting for this 
ship^ and the other captains dared not say a word^ he had 
an audience of the chief captain, and told him he could see 
that the principal reason why they could not double Cape 
St. Augustine was the constant waiting for his ship, and as 
the season was far advanced it was very doubtful whether 
they would get to India that year, and since he could not 
keep up with the rest they must leave him behind with 
another ship in his company, whichever he might select, 
while he himself set sail and kept on his voyage with the rest. 
The chief captain replied that if the king,. D. Manoel, had 
entrusted him with the fleet, it was for his advantage, and 



24 


C0MMBNTAB1E8 OF 


therefore he would have them wait for his ship^ as in it he 
carried his cargo. As Afonso Dalboquerque would lose 
much if ho did not get to India that year^ a few days after- 
wards he went again to beg the chief captain to let his ship 
go, which produced angry words between them^ and with 
good reasouj to which Afonso Dalboquerque made no 
reply^ nor for the future was he minded to say any more 
with respect to the voyage. When the chief captain^ a few 
days afterwards^ perceived the mistake he had made, and 
that he lost more in not reaching India that year than he 
gained by making the fleet wait for his ship, and that all 
the masters and pilots, when they spoke with him, told him 
of it, he made up his mind to adopt a remedy. So when 
they were in the latitude of the Island of the Ascension, he 
hung out a square flag, and all the captains came on board 
immediately to know what he wished. The chief captain 
told them that he had resolved that they should all set their 
sails, and not wait for any one, but each make way with what 
speed he could, and wait for him at Mozambique. And 
when they were all in their course for doubling the Gape 
of Good Hope, as the morning broke they came in sight of 
land very extensive and very beautiful. When Afonso Dal- 
boquerque saw it, he went and spoke with the chief captain, 
and told him that since it had not yet been discovered, they 
ought to make for it, and know what land it was. As this 
advice seemed good to the chief captain, he gave orders to 
work his ship to windward, so as to come up wjth it, and 
all the others did the same, and when the evening was come 
he shaped his course again as at first. This land proved to be 
some islands,^ to which they gave the name of '' Tristfto da 
Cunha'% as he was the first who discovered them. And 
sailing along past them just as the sun was on the point of 
setting, the wind began to blow so hard, and with so many 
showers, that the ships were unable to keep with the chief 
^ In the South Atlantic, 37 deg. 6 min. S., 12 deg. 2 min. W. 



AVONSO DALBOQUERQUE. 


25 


captain, and all separated from him, except Afonso Dalbo- 
querque, who followed him, and they kept on their way 
together for some days, with a favourable wind. And one 
night they encountered such a great storm from the front 
that it separated them; and the ship of Afonso Dalboquerqne 
was forced to lie to for seven watches^ with great labouring, 
and refused to answer her helm. 

But it pleased Our Lord that the weather cleared up, and 
they sailed all that night without seeiug the light on board 
the admiral’s ship, nor did they see the ship on the following 
morning. And Afonso Dalboquerqne kept on that course, 
having doubled the cape, until he came in sight of the first 
islands, there he found Francisco de Tavora; and they sailed 
together for Mozambique, where they found a caravela which 
had started from Portugal many days after Tristfto da 
Cnnha, the captain of which told them that Lionel Goutinho 
had gone to Quiloa.* A few days afterwards, the chief captain 
arrived with the other ships (except that of Alvaro Telez, who 
doubled the Island of S. Lourenzo’ by the outer passage, 
and stood over to Melinde), and left there a letter for that 
captain in which he gave him orders to go and wait at the 
Cape of Gnardafum; except also Bui Pereira, who went into 
a harbour in the Island of S. Lonrenzo, called Tanana, where 
he remained for some days, getting information about the 
land, as it was the first time of its being discovered, and 
from thence went on to Mozambique, taking with him two 
negroes, who went willingly with him of their own accord. 


* An rdogiei d$ mar. A rdogio de mar was a half-hour glass. 

* On the African coast, 9 deg. 8., 89 dag. 29 min. £. 

* Mow Madagascar, on the east coast of Africa. 



2G 


COMMENTARIES OF 


CHAPTER IX. 

How the chief captain, TristSo da Gnnha, from the information which 
the negroes whom Rui Pereira brought gave him, determined to 
go and discover the Island of S. Louren^o. 

The chief captain^ having arrived at Moqambique, deter- 
mined^ as it was now too late to cross over to India^ to fit 
out his fleet there^ for making the passage to Qocotora^ 
wherein the king^ D. Manoeb had ordered him to build a 
fortress for the rallying of some Christians^ who^ as he was 
informed^ were living in that island^ that they might not be 
troubled by the Fartaquins and other Moorish vessels which 
went thither to take in water^ when they passed through 
the strait of Meca. At this juncture^ Rui Pereira arrived 
and told him that at the time of that storm^ wherein he had 
parted from him^ he went into a harbour of the Island Sn. 
LourenQo^ and while he was casting anchorj two almadicts^ 
with some negroes came up to his ship as peaceful people^ 
and showed him silver^ waz^ and cotton stuffs ; and they 
told him that if he would go in they would trade with him^ 
for there was much of these things in the land ; and all this 
they said by signs, for there was no one in the ship who 
could understand them. But when he would have gone in 
to get more certain information about this, the pilot, master, 
and factor of the ship, made a great demand that he should 
not go in, but keep on the voyage towards Mozambique, 
for the ship belonged to them, and they were not obliged to 
discover new lands, and they furthermore promised to 
indemnify him. And hearing their demands, he had brought 
these two negroes, as they seemed intelligent men, and set 
sail. The chief captain was very much pleased with this 
news, because if it were true, he could load his ships there 
and return to Portugal; and he sent immediately for a 


* Almaiiia^ an almode, or launch made of a single log. 



AFONSO DALBOQUERQUE. 


27 


native Moor of Quiloa^ who was in Mozambique and was 
conversant (as he had information) with the language of the 
men^ and bade him inquire of these negroes what there was 
in their land^ and by what name it was called. They told 
him that their land was called Tanand. and that it contained 
much ginger^ cloves, silver, and wax. Hereupon the chief 
captain ordered that Afonso Dalboquerque, and all the other 
captains, masters, and pilots of the fleet should be sum- 
moned, and informed them of all that had passed with the 
negroes, adding that<he thought that, as they had to remain 
there some days, they ought to go and search for this port 
which Bui Pereira had discovered, and so he would have 
them point out which route he should take, for he was 
determined to go thither. The pilots and masters of the 
fleet were of opinion that he ought to explore this land 
on the northern side. Afonso Dalboquerque, as he was a 
mariner and understood navigation very well, perceiving 
that the masters and pilots were speaking in error, asked 
them why it was their opinion that the northern route 
should be chosen, since the island was not explored on that 
side, nor was there in the fleet a single person who knew 
how far the land stretched out on the northern side. The 
pilots and masters made no reply to this, for they had none 
to make, but adhered to what they had said. When Afonso 
Dalboquerque saw that they were unwilling to withdraw 
from their opinion, he would have nothing more to do with 
them in the matter. To end these differences, the chief 
captain begged him to tdl him his opinion; he replied, that 
since this exploration was determined upon, it ought to be 
made from that southern part, whence Bni Pereira had 
come, for it was not good advice to explore new parts by an 
uncertain route, and the more so, as he had a pilot who 
could carry him, without any trouble, to the port which Bui 
Pereira had discovered, and whidb conld be reached in six 
days sailing before the wind ; and, further, in the present 



28 


COMMENTARIES OF 


season it would be very diflScult to double tbo point of tbe 
land of tbe Island^ wbicb was in twelve degrees north lati- 
tude^ for the east winds were blowing, and the currents 
running fast, and much time would be spent in doubling it, 
and it was time that they were more in need of than any- 
thing else. And although in this advice there was no one 
who could contradict Afonso Dalboquerque^s opinion, yet, 
since what he alleged did not agree with the chief captain's 
opinion, he was not satisfied with what he had told him, and 
was guided by the opinion of the pilots and masters. Not 
many days, however, elapsed before he perceived the mistake 
he had made ; and when he was at length desirous of remedy- 
ing it, he had wasted three months along the coast, suffering 
many hardships and perils without achieving anything. 


CHAPTER X. 

How the chief captain, Tristffo da Cunha, got himself ready to go and 
explore the island, and what took place therein. 

When the chief captain had settled what course he 
intended to take, he made ready, and left Mozambique at 
the beginning of November with all the ships under the 
command of Afonso Dalboquerque, and those of Jofto 
Gomez, and Ruy Pereira, and Job Queimado ; the last named 
having arrived but two ,days before, for he was left behind, 
having been separated from the fleet in the tempest which 
struck it at the turn of Cape St. Augustine. He related that 
he had steered for the Island of St. Thomas,' and thence 
made his way along shore as far as Mozambique; and in his 
course, sixty leagues in the sea from the river of Angola, he 
had found a very large island, uninhabited and thickly 


> (?) On the coast of Guinea, Odeg. 20 min. N., 6deg. 40 min. E. 



AFONSO DALBOQUERQUE. 


29 


wooded. The chief captain having started, in a few days 
sighted the reef of St. Mary, which is a crown of sand in 
17^ deg. of latitude, sixty leagues from Mozambique, which 
Afonso Dalboquerque discovered the first time he wont to 
India, and all the fleet sailed by that reef, the pilots with 
their sounding leads in hand, in from eight to four and a half 
fathoms^ depth; and coming upon this bottom, as it was 
night, they cast anchor. When morning broke they re- 
sumed- their course, and so journeyed until they sighted 
land, and when close to land they put out their boats, and 
took a small Zambucd^ with two Moors, whom they im- 
mediately carried before the chief captain, and these 
brought him to a place of the Moors^ which was close by, 
and when they arrived there they disembarked. The Moors 
abandoned the place, and fled into the interior country, and 
our people followed them up, and killed some, whom they 
found hiding in the woods. And the chief captain ordered 
his men to keep together, and not go too far in, and they 
brought some women, whom he oi^ered to be set free. He 
then set the place on fire and embarked with all his people 
and sailed idong the coast; and with the greatest pre- 
cautions they could, they made for a bay which is called 
Lulangane : within which, at the distance of a bowshot 
from the mainland, they found an island, densely peopled, 
wherein the king had his residence, though his establish- 
ments and fiurms were on the mainland. And on conimencing 
to explore the bay, because tl}e people had not kept together, 
the chief captain g^ve orders that two boats with men 
should take up a position between the island and the main- 
land, and not suffer any Moors to pass over from the other 
side. And these being gone, he went with all the ships 
and anchored opposite the place, and disembarked with all 

^ As naos, ou Zamhueoi^ em quo navegaySo estes Mouros, nem 
tinhSo ouberU (deck), nem pregaduxa (bolt-work)’* DamiSo de Groes, 
29 , 2 .— 



30 


COMMENTARIES OF 


his men. When the Moors saw the determination of our 
people^ such a panic struck them^ that, without fearing the 
boats, they came down to the beach to seek a means of 
crossing from the other side to the mainland, in zambv>co8, 
almadias, and some swimming; and sudi was the haste they 
made to cross, that the zambucos, and almadicte, owing to 
the great rolling of the sea (by reason of the current 
of the water from a river which debouched there), upset, 
with all those on board, so that the sea was quite strewn 
over with dead men, women^ and children. The chief 
captain attacked the place, and entering into it, found many 
Moors yet therein, with pikes and shields, waiting for him, 
and put them all to the sword. And after this engagement, 
he gave orders to sack the place, wherein they found many 
clothes, silver, and gold, for the ships from Melinde and 
Mombasa come thither to trade, and in exchange for these 
things bring slaves, and supplies : and such was the quantity 
of the rice that twenty ships could not cany it. The chief 
captain stayed there three days ; and after all the ships had 
taken water and supplies, he embarked and went along the 
coast, intending to doable the headland, wherein he wasted 
much time, without being able to doable it, owing to the 
east winds and currents. In this coarse, he captured a 
Moor, who showed him cloves, and told him that there was 
much in the woods ; the chief captain, however, was by this 
time so disgusted with their lying, that he attached no credit 
to the tale, and let the man go,^and made his course with all 
the fleet for that part where Buy Pereira had taken the 
negroes. 



AFONSO DALDOQUBBQUE. 


31 


CHAPTER XI. 

How the chief captain, TristSo da Canha, returned along the coast, and 
all but perudied, and what passed with the great Afonso Dalbo- 
querque. 

The chief captain having tamed bade along the coasts as 
he was unable to doable the headland at S. Lourongo^ 
as I have saidj the two Moors whom he had takon at 
Lulangane carried him to a large bay^ which is called Qada^ 
entirely surrounded with tribes of GafreSj because the prin- 
cipal exchange of all places on the coast of Melinde^ 
Mombaqa^ and Mogadoxo is established there. As soon as 
the fleet had cast anchor^ the chief captain with all his men 
got into the boats^ and made for the land^ where he attacked 
two tribes^ who were stationed along the coast. The Cafres, 
whose number reached about two thousand^ armed with 
pikesj shields^ bows, and arrows^ although they at first 
showed the intention of preventing our landings when they 
saw the determined spirit of our people^ darbd not wait^ but 
fled into the woods. Now Afonso DalboquerquOj seeing the 
waste of time in discovering that island^ and the great risk 
incurred by the fleets although the chief captain had resented 
any remonstrance made to him^ went to him and told him 
he ought to bear in mind that it was now the middle of 
January, and that eJl the time that might hereafter be spent 
in that exploration would be lost, and that they would be 
performing more service to the king by going to the Cape 
of Goardafum, and waiting for the ships which came from 
India through the straits with spices, and by building the 
fortress in Qocotora, according to the king’s orders, than 
by going on to their own destruction in the way they were 
doing. And if, nevertheless, he would continne this new 
exploration, he desired permission to go to Qocotora, and on 
his way enlist all the ships, wheresoever he might find 



32 


GOMMENTABIES OF 


thenij and take them' with him. The chief captain^ who 
was highly delighted with the prospect of exploring the 
whole of the Island of St. Lawrence, approved of this^ and 
gave permission for him to go, and delivered over to him all 
the ships which came from Portugal^ with orders to remain 
with him^ and gave him^ as well, authority over all the 
daptains whom he might find on that coast, that they should 
obey him. Although Afonso Dalboquerque carried secret 
powers from the king, D. Manoel, sufficient for all he might 
wish to do, yet, to av.oid any quarrelling which might arise, 
about which of the two had the greater authority, he took his 
commission from the chief captain. After this, the latter 
despatched Antonio de Saldanha to go to Mozambique, and 
take the command of the ship Sanctiago, and get it ready, 
for he intended to despatch it to Portugal, immediately 
upon his arrivaL Afonso Didboquerque, having taken his 
leave, collected his ships, and went straight to Mozambique, 
and on the road gave orders that Antonio do Gampo should 
go to Quiloa, and request Lionel Goutinho, and the captain 
of the ship Qar^a, to take all the supplies they required and 
wait for him at Melinde. Six days after the departure of 
Antonio do Campo, Afonso*l5alboquerque arrived at Mozam- 
bique, and began to set about the refitting of his ships, 
which he made ready in a short time, and then he left, 
steering for Melinde by a straight course, where he was 
to join the other captains, and to go together with them 
to the Cape of Guardafum. And being as far advanced 
as the Islands of Comoro^ he came by night to see the 
chief captain. And when it was morning he struck his flag, 
and came up close to hiogi, and went to pay his respects. 
The chief captain recounted to him the many misfortunes he 
had experienced since they had separated ; how Ruy Pereira 
had been lost in some shallows, wherein he himself would 

^ The group of Comoro Idands, Africa, 11 deg. 80 min. S., 48 deg. 
80 mm. £. 



AFONSO DALBOQUXBQUE. 


83 


also have perished, as it was at night, had it not been for 
the shoating which the sailors made when they touched the 
sand, and for the vigilance of his pilot, who, hearing the 
shouting, ordered the ship to be stopped, and miraculously 
turned and- went out the same way he went in, for all in 
front was shallows. Afonso Dalboquerque returned with him 
thence to Mo9ambique, where they found Joao da Nova very 
ill, who had sailed last year for India, in the ship Flor de la 
mar, for Portugal, but he, in tacking to pass the Cape of Good 
Hope, had sprung a large leak, which forced him to put in 
at the Islands of Angoja, where he remained some days 
working to repair it. When he found it so large that he could 
not stop it, he had made his way to Moqambique, to wait 
for the ships which were coming from the kingdom, in hopes 
of some means of repairing his ship. The chief captain was 
veiy glad to see him, for he was a friend of his, and tried to 
get his ship repaired, and because the leak was at the step 
of the mast, and could not be mended without discharging the 
cargo, he bought a merchant ship, of which Andr^ Dias (who 
was afterwards Alcaide of Lisbon) was captain and factor, 
and ordered all the cargo of the Flor de la mar to be stowed 
in it, and gave the command of it to Antonio de Saldanha, and 
sent it to Portugal, and in company with it a ship of FernSLo 
de Lorouha, of which the captain was Diogo Mendez Correa. 
When he was on his course doubling the Cape of Good Hope, 
he discovered a very favourable watering place for the ships, 
before the Island of St. Elena^ had been noticed. To this, 
he gave the name of the watering station of Saldanha, and 
it was here that the Cafres of the land murdered the Viceroy 
D. Francisco Dalmeida, when he touched there to take water 
on his way from India to Portugal* 

* S9t. Hdena. 

* This event took place on the Ist of March, 1510. For a biographi- 
cal memoir and portrait of this Viceroy, see Barretto de Resende, in 
MS. Sloan. 197, fo. 9b : — ^^Foy morto pellos Cafres Na ag rla de 
Saldanha o prim*^ de Mar^o do anno mil quinhentos e dcs aondc 
aynde oje se dis estSo sens ossos.*’ 



34 


COMMENTARIES OP 


CHAPTER XII. 

Howr the chief captain, TristSo da Gunha, left Mozambique with hia 
fleet, And had an audience with the King of Melinde, and thence 
went to Angoja and destro 7 ed it. 

As soon as Antonio de Saldanha had sailed for Portagal^ 
the chief captain -began to repair his fleet, and furnish it 
with all necessaries, and when all was ready, he started 
one day at morning, and in a few days arrived at 
Melinde. When he had entered the harbour, with all his 
ships having their flags flying, they saluted the city, and 
anchored, and then he went on shore with all his captains to 
pay the king a visit, and, on the part of the King of Portu- 
gal, made him a present which he brought, and made offer 
of his service in all that he might* demand of him, with 
many other offerings which he made. The king thanked 
him very much, and said that he was very thankful to the 
King of Portugal, his brother, for all the kind messages he 
had sent him, because he was his true servant and friend.^ 
And on this account the Kings of Mombaqa and Angoja 
were his chief enemies, and caused him much annoyance : 
therefore, he begged that, before the chief captain left 
those parts, he would take vengeance upon them, that they 
might know he enjoyed the friendship of the King of 
Portugal. The chief captain told him, that, since the prin- 
cipal reason of his coming thither was to preserve the ancient 
friendship which the King of Portugal had with him, he 
promised him before many days should elapse he should have 
news of the state his enemies were in. So he took his 
leave with great show of friendship, and embarked. And 
Afonso Dalboquerque, on taking his leave of the king, told 

' Camoes qpeaksof the king and the people of Melinde with praise: — 
Gente mais verdadeira, e mats humana, 

Que toda a de outra terra atraz deixada.’* — Lutiada^ ii, 74. 

In stanza 82, Gama styles the king Rei benino, . . . de peito sincero, 
liumano, e raro”. 



AFONSO DALBOQUEBQUB. 


35 


him that the King of Portugal^ his lord, had sent him with 
a fleet to conquer the kingdom of Ormuz, and all that coast 
of A.rabia which had not jet been made known to our 
pilots; so he begged he would of his favour order three 
pilots, who had good knowledge of the navigation of those 
parts, to be given him that he might take them with him, 
and he would paj them well and treat them as his own 
subjects. The king ordered the governors of the city to 
give him the pilots whom he asked for, and whatever else 
might be necessary for the service of the King of Portugal, 
his brother. The governors gave him the three principal 
pilots of the country, who always sailed to those parts, and 
had good experience of all the harbours of that coast of 
Arabia. When all had taken their leave of the king, they 
embarked and set sail, and without putting into any port, 
they anchored in the bay of Angoja, and as soon as they 
had anchored, the chief captain sent Lionel Coutinho in his 
boat to shore to obtain information about the people who 
were in the place and about the fortress. The Moors, who 
were waiting on the beach, as soon as the boat drew near 
to shore, began to shoot arrows at it, and would not parley 
with our people. So Lionel Coutinho ordered the boat to be 
kept off, that the men might not be wounded, and informed 
the chief captain of what hfi:d passed. He, therefore, sent at 
once for the captains, and told them that he was determined 
to punish the King of Angoja because of the offences which 
he had done to the King of Melinde, as well as on account of 
the slight he had given to his message ; so they should all 
get ready, and on the next day, before morning, should 
come on board his ship that they might go together and 
attack the place. When the hour was come, the captains 
came in their boats on board the flag-ship, and thereupon 
stood in towards land to attack the city. When the Moors 
saw the boats coming, they came and awaited them on the 
beach to prevent their landing. But the chief captain 
observed their determination, and desiring room for dis- 



86 


COMMSNTABIBS OV 


embarking^ ordered the bombardiers to fire at them with 
the small cannons that w^re in the boats. And the Moors, 
when they saw they were harassed by the shot, deserted 
the beach, and having retired together into the city, took 
their wives and children and as much baggage as they 
could carry on their backs, and fled into the interior of the 
country. As soon as the beach was clear, the chief captain 
disembarked with all the soldiers in two battalions, Afonso 
Dalboquerque in the van with part of the men, and himself 
in the rear with the royal flag. And as they met with no 
resistance when disembarking, they entered the city at once, 
and found it empty of people and moveables. So the chief 
captain, who perceived that there was nothing to be feared 
from any side, ordered the fleet to be furnished with supplies, 
of which there were plenty there, and gave permission to his 
men to sack the city, but to return quickly, for he was going 
to order it to be set on fire. And because at the time it 
was fired they were not yet returned, and were all scattered 
up and down in the houses sacking them, they would have 
been burned too, had it not happened just in the nick of 
time, that the wind blew from that part to which they were 
making their way; even when they desired to return, it was 
only with great difficuKy that they managed to do so. As 
soon as all had returned to the ships, the chief captain 
ordered that the fleet should set sail, and sailed out of the 
harbour with the land breeze that was then blowing, and 
steered in a straight line for Braboa. 

This city of Angoja is very large, peopled with Moors, who 
trade at Qofala, and all along that coast. There were no 
houses of stone and mortar iil it except the king’s mansions ; 
it was entirely surrounded with many gardens and fruit 
trees, which made it very luxuriant ; its bay was veiy good 
and afforded capital anchorage ; it was not fortified, but 
situated on the edge of the sea. The king was a Moorish 
merchant, who came from abroad, but as he was very rich 
he had made himself lord of all that land. 



AFONSO DALBOQUEBQUE. 


37 


CHAPTER Xni. 

How the diief captain, TtietSo da Canha, proceeded to Braboa, and 
what passed there. 

The fleet having set sailj the chief captain proceeded 
along the coast towards the City of Braboa ; and as soon as 
th^ had all anchored on their arrival^ seeing a great 
disturbance on the beach, he sent Lionel Coutinho in his 
skiff to shore, to find out with certainty what the Moors 
were about, but before the skiff reached shore, those who 
stood on the edge of the beach made signs to him not to 
come into the land. When Lionel Coutinho saw that the 
Moors were unwilling to parley with him, he returned to the 
ships, and informed the chief captain of the disposition in 
which he had found them. And he, being annoyed, because 
the king had refused to receive his message, ordered all the 
captains to be summoned, and gave them an account of Lionel 
Coutinho^s proceeding with the Moors, and told them there 
were many men among them, and these veiy well armed ; 
but for all this he was determined to attack the place, and 
risk all to destroy it, so they should make ready, and on the 
following day before daybreak come on board his ship that 
all might go together to attack the place. The Moors, who 
were stationed on the beach, seeing the commotion that was 
going on in the fleet, and the collection of boats around the 
flag-ship, (which appeared to them as it were of people de- 
termined to attack them), in order that they should not be 
taken by surprise, commenced to make themselves ready, and 
collected many men to prevent the disembarking of our 
men. They relied, too, on the sea, which broke upon the 
shore, (as it was a boisterous coast) and would overset them 
when landing and drown them all. The king being thus 
minded, there went to him by night two old Moors who had 
gone thither to live, having fled from Calient disgusted with 



S8 


COMMENTARIES OF 


the war which the Qamorim kept wagingwith the Portuguese^ 
and said to him : Sire^ thou art not well advised in desiring 
war with the Franks, over whom the Qamorim of Calicut^ all 
powerful as he is^ could never get the better in the war 
which he had with them, and thou oughtest to believe that 
there is no single king of all this coast so powerful as to be 
able to prevent them from landing in his territory whenever 
they desire, and leaving it full of blood, burning and 
destroying it as they did Angoja ; and since this is so, we 
beg thou wilt deign to hear them, and make a reasonable 
truce with the chief captain of this fleet, and not hazard 
the loss of thy estate, and the destruction of all of us. But 
should their demands be so unreasonable that thy honour 
cannot grant them, then the business can be continually put 
off with fair words, for this is the season when the vara of 
Coromandel sets this way, as thou knowest, and if it should 
come when they are anchored there, all their fleet will be 
destroyed, and not one ship be saved, and by these means 
we shall all be revenged upon them, without thy estate being 
hazarded/^ The king was inclined to follow the Moors^ 
advice, and thanked them deeply for their remembrance of 
him, and sent at once to convene the principal natives, who 
had recommended him to fight, and informed them of what 
the two Moors had said. And when they had thoroughly 
discussed the matter between themselves, it was agreed that 
they ought to follow the advice the Moors had given them. 
Therefore, before it was yet morning, the king sent a Moor 
in a boat with a white flag, to request the chief captain to 
come under a safe-conduct and arrange matters peaceably, 
and he went immediately on receipt of this message, and re- 
turned forthwith with the safe-conduct. And as soon as he 
had arrived, the king ordered one of the principal governors 
of the land to speak with the chief captain, and this (go- 
vernor) told him that the king was very angry at the scanty 
welcome the Moors had given to his captain, whom he had 



AFONSO DALBOQUEBQUE. 


39 


sent thither, but as the ofiendera were many in number, he 
could not single out the guilty ones to have them punished, 
but he desired to have peace and friendship with the King of 
Portugal, and desired he would send word of what he wished, 
for all should be done. TristSo da Cunha replied that he 
was chief captain of the King of Portugal, who had sent 
him with the orders to make stern war against and destroy 
all the kings and lords who, unwilling to be friends and 
tributaries, were established along that coast which was of 
his conquering. And because the king of Angoja had not 
cared to be obedient to this, ho had destroyed him ; and so 
also he was determined to do with the king of Braboa, un- 
less he was willing to obey the King of Portugal and pay 
him tribute ; but if ho was willing to be his vassal, he 
would serve him with that fleet against his enemies, just as 
he had done for the King of Melinde by reason of the great 
friendship which he also showed towards the King of 
Portugal, and by reason of the favour and honour shown to 
his captains who went to his port. The Moor returned to 
land with this reply, and related to the king, before all the 
principal men of the place who were with him, all that had 
taken place with the chief captain. And after long dis- 
cussion which took place respecting this reply at which 
they were not pleased, the king sent again the same Moor 
to the chief captain to say, that to send to him for tribute 
was not desiring friendship with him, but seeking reasons 
for quarrelling if he did not grant what was demanded of 
him, for he had never been a tributary of any king, but 
rather on the contrary all those of that coast endeavoured 
to have him as their friend ; yet, as this demand was some- 
thing new, and could not be answered without consulting 
the chief men of the land, he begged him of his favour to 
wait for three or four days while he assembled all the 
merchants and arranged with them what could be done. 
The chief captain replied that he had other affairs to attend 



40 


COMMENTARIES OF 


to^ which the King of Portugal had ordered to be done^ 
and therefore he could not wait so many days; so^ if he 
desired to come to terms with him, he must send back an 
answer at once^ and, if not, he should do what he had 
orders to do. The Moor returned with an answer, begging 
him greatly of his mercy to grant that extension of time 
which the king of Braboa, his lord, had sent him to ask ; 
for it would not be fair, since all that population would 
have to pay the tribute, when once it had been agreed 
upon, that it should be done without the knowledge and 
consent of all. The chief captain, to be final with him, gave 
him another day, saying that if no reply came before night 
he should consider it as refused. The Moor went on shore 
and conveyed this message to the king, and on the fol- 
lowing day, when the sun was already set, returned with a 
reply, and said that the king was willing to pay tribute, 
but could not determine how much it should be without 
first consulting the principal Moors of the land, and all 
the merchants, so he had ordered them to be summoned, 
and would send back word at once when they had arrived. 
The chief captain, seeing that the Moor who was employed 
on these messages went and came from side to side with- 
out bringing anything to an end, and that there was 
nothing but delay and lying on the part of the king, 
ordered him, when he had come with the last message, to 
be tied to a stake, showing that he was willing to make a 
treaty, and was determined to know the reid reason why 
the king was unwilling to make an end of the business, 
for to reply yea or no there was need of but little time; 
and he warned him that he had better tell the truth, for 
if he lied, he would throw him into the sea with a cannon 
ball round his neck. The Moor, out of fear that he 
would carry his threat into effect, said : '' Sir, thou art in 
front of this city where at this season of the year a wind 
arises which is odled the vara de Coromandel^ which comes 



AFONSO DALBOQUNKQUE. 


41 


from those parts so suddenly and so fiercely that if it 
were to come now, not a single vessel of your fleet could 
escape from certain destruction.^ And it is from this hope, 
which we all support, that it will come every day, that 
the king carries on these delays with you.'' The chief 
captain, in fear of this event, ordered the Moor to be well 
treated, and made ready to attack the city on the morrow 
before daybreak. 


CHAPTER XIV. 

How the chief captain, Tristao da Gunha, went to attack the city of 
Braboa, and after its destruction sailed for ^ocotora. 

As soon as this parley was over between the chief captain 
and the Moor who carried the message, the chief captain at 
once informed the captains of all that had taken place, and 
said that his determination was, on the following day be- 
fore dawn, to attack the city. He ordered them all, there- 
fore, to get themselves ready, and, at the appointed time, 
come on board his ship, bringing small anchors and long 
cords with them in the boats, to leave as guides in the. sea, 
that they might not be upset; for, as it wafei an open harbour, 
there was a great surf on the shore. The captains spent 
all the night in preparations, and, when the hour was come, 
went with their men on board the flag-ship ; and, as soon 
as they had arrived, the chief captain stood in to shore 
two hours before daybreak, without sounding trumpets, lest 
they should be heard. The king, meanwhile, dreading 
that something or other had happened to delay the Moor 
whom he had sent, but who had brought back no answer, 
gave orders to watch the beach all night, so that our men 

^ Vara dg Coromandel^ a dangerous blast of wind that fluently 
arises without warning on the Coromandel coast. — BlwUaia, 



42 


COMMBNTABIEB OF 


could not go SO quietly but that they were perceived : and 
many Moors flocked to the shore at oncoj and did all they 
could to prevent our landing. And, because they were 
numerous and the sea very boisterous, our people expe- 
rienced great difficulty in disembarking. Yet, for all that 
they were hurled along by the water and half dripping, 
they attacked the Moors so bravely, that many of them 
soon lay deady and those who escaped from their sword 
fled towards the city. When the chief captain saw they 
were put to rout, he was unwilling to give those Moors who 
fled time to rally from the panic into which the sudden 
attack had cast them ; so he ordered Afonso Dalboquerque 
to take the vanguard in charge and go in pursuit of them, 
which he accordingly did with the men he had with him. 
At the entrance into the city the Moors made a stand 
against our men, and killed about four or five, and wounded 
Antonio de S4 in the face with an arrow. 

While this conflict with the Moors was taking place, the 
chief captain came up, and all together entered the city 
behind the fugitives ; and women threw down stones from 
the terraces and wounded many. When the Moors had 
arrived at a large square containing a mosque, all had col- 
lected together and awaited our attack with the determina- 
tion to resist to the death ; and, as they were very nume- 
rous and the square large, our men, who were but few, were 
in danger of destruction. Directly news of this came to the 
boats, the mariners and bombardiers who had remained in 
charge of them, left them, and took leathern belts full of 
cases of gunpowder and of other firearms, and started off at 
full speed for the square where the chief captain was, and, 
with the powder in cases, lances, and firearms which they 
carried, made great havoc among the Moors. Our people, 
with this fresh succour, pressed so hard upon them that 
they turned their backs and fled on out of the city, in which 
none remained but women, who, laden with household goods. 



AFONSO DALBOQCTBBQUE. 


43 


followed their husbands. And our people followed after 
them and came up with them^ and killed many and took 
from them what they carried. 

The chief captain, being fearful lest they should follow 
the MoorSj who were flying pell-mell^ too far, ordered Afonso 
Dalboquerque to recall his men and not permit any further 
pursuit. And when they were collected, the chief captain 
returned to the square, and set to work to attack the 
mosque, where they killed all the Moors who were within, 
and in entering it they wounded him in the leg with an 
arrow. At the end of this affair he took up his quarters in 
the square, and, after resting, he begged Afonso Dal- 
boquerque to do him the favour to dub him knight; for 
he was desirous of receiving the honour from his hand 
there in that place, where the Moors had shed his blood. 
And forthwith all the people were collected in the centre 
of the square, and Afonso Dalboquerque dubbed him 
knight with the wonted ceremonies. After TristSLo da 
Cunha had been dubbed knight, he, in his turn, conferred 
the same honour upon his son, Nuno da Cunha, and many 
other Fidalgos. And when these ceremonies were done, the 
chief captain went with all the rest to the palace of the 
king, which was very large and very beautiful, and into 
which, until then, he had permitted no one to enter. Within 
it he/ound much silver and much gold, many silk stuffs, and 
many other veiy rich things, and much money in xerajma,^ 
all which he divided among the captains and noble persons 
of the fleet. Then, as it was getting time to embark, and 
also on account of the fear he had of the coming of the 
storm of which the Moor had told him; the chief captain 
ordered the recall to be sounded on the trumpets; and, after 
all the people had been gathered together, they set fire to 
the city in four parts, and it burned so fiercely, that it was 
a terrible thing to behold. Therein was burned much goods 
^ Silver pieces, of the value of Is. 3d. sterling. 



44 


COMMEIITASUS OF 


which onr people had not time to bring away, inasmuch as 
the sea did not allow of their putting it on board so rapidly 
as the chief captain wished'. 

Braboa is a large city^ with Teiy good houses of stone 
and mortar. It is 'situated on the water’s edge^ and has no 
harbour : all is open coast, unprotected on all sides. It is 
peopled with the native Moors, who trade with Qofala and 
all along the coast. Thither^ also, come the ships of Cam- 
baia^ laden with stuffs, and in this city the principid trade 
in them is carried on; for a very large river passes through 
it, which cuts the whole of the land, and does not run out 
to the sea : and, by means of this river, the merchants of 
this land sail to many parts, and go thence to a fair which 
is held in Manamotapa, which is the interior of Qofida, 
whither they bring these stufis from Cambaia and Anfifto, 
sandal- woods and rose-water and other merchandise, where- 
by they make much profit, and from thence take gold and 
other commodities : and all those in the interior are wont 
to navigate this river, and come to Braboa, which would be 
about half a league from the sea, and on account of this 
river the city has become so noble, and has many good 
buildings. 


CHAPTER XV. 

How the chief captain, TristSo da Cnnha, left Braboa, uid made his 
course direct for the island of (Jocotora, and what happened there. 

Having collected his ships, the chief captain set sail, and 
kept along this coast with all the fleet, intending to touch 
at Magadaxo. And, as it had been agreed the other day 
that they should attack the dty, Afonso Dalboquerque went 
forward and anchored in front of it. But when the chief 
pilot of the fleet, by name Afonso Lopez Buraquinha, per- 
ceived that it was the intention of the chief captain to attack 



AFONSO DALBOQUEBQUE. 


45 


Magadaxo,^ and tliat much time would be spent (since he was 
well acquainted with the navigation of these parts^ having 
gone thither already in company with Antonio de Sal- 
danha)^ he went to him and told him that the monsoon of 
those parts was now nearly exhausted^ and if he went any 
farther on that coarse there would be no time left for him 
to doable the shallows of St. Lazarus, which were distant 
fifty leagues, — ^but when they were doubled, the head- winds, 
which at that season blew off that shore, could not do him 
any injury, even if they were to come ; for there was plenty 
of sea-room for tacking. The chief captain ordered the 
pilots, both Moors, and those of the fleet, to be summoned, 
and told them the opinion of his pilot; and, as all were 
agreed in this opinion, he ordered the course to be shaped 
towards Qocotora, and made signals to Afonso Dalboquer- 
que to weigh anchor and follow him. And, without touch- 
ing at other land, they went and anchored at Qoco, which 
is the principal port of that island, and where the popula- 
tion lives : and, with flags flying from all the ships in holi- 
day trim, they saluted the place with artillery, as it was 
inhabited by Christians. But when the chief captain saw the 
fortress which the Moors had built there, surrounded with 
wall and barbican, and with a keep,^ which was very different 
to the information which the king, D. Manoel, had received, 
he sent for Afonso Dalboqnerque and all the captains of the 
fleet, to come to his ship ; and he told them that the king, his 
lord, had ordered him to construct a fortress in that island, 
and to leave behind D. Afonso de Noronha, then present 
there, as captain of it, for the guard and protection of the 
Christians who had lived there since the time of St. 
Thomas, the king^s desire being to extend the name of 
Our Lord throughout all the parts he had conquered ; but 

^ In Zanguebar, 2 deg. 3 min. N., 45 deg. 18 min. E. ^ 

* Torr€ de menagem^ the chief or hi^^esb tower in a castle, in which 
the constable or keeper of it professes fealty to his sovereign.— Vxeyra, 



46 


COMMENTARIES OF 


because he found this fortress to exceed the information 
which his Highness had, he begged them to give their 
opinion as to what he should do in the case. All the cap- 
tains told him that he ought to have an audience with the 
captain of the fortress, to know of him what he intended to 
do, and should he be unwilling to put himself under the 
obedience due to the King of Portugal, that then he ought 
to attack it and make an entry by force of arms. This 
advice seemed good to the chief captain, and he sent imme- 
diately Pero Yaz Dorta and Gaspar Rodriguez, interpreter, to 
land, to tell the captain that the King of Portugal had sent 
him with that fleet to make a fortress in that island, as he 
had been informed that it belonged to Christians, but he 
found it really possessed by Moors ; so he begged and 
desired him to quit the fortress, and safe-conduct and 
passage should be given to him and all his people to go to 
their pwn land. But if he were unwilling to do so, he was 
determined to take the fortress from him by force, and leave 
not one Moor alive in it, for such were the commands of the 
King of Portugal his lord. The captain replied that they 
should say to the chief captain that neither he nor the Farta- 
quins, whom he had in his company, would die of fear, but 
by the sword, and he might do as he chose, for he on his 
part would not leave the fortress until all were dead, for this 
was the custom of the Fartaquins. When this determined 
reply was brought to the chief captain, he ordered Afonso 
Dalboquerque and the captains to be sent for, and gave 
them an account of it all. All agreed that the fortress 
should be attacked, and that Our Lord would help them, and 
tame the pride of the Moor^ for although from without it 
appeared very strong, still it was so small that it would not 
possibly contain enough people to withstand the power of 
that fleet. 

This having been agreed upon, because in the port 
of Qoco, where they were anchored, the sea was always 



AFONSO DALBOQUBBQUE. 


47 


boisterous, and a landing therein could not be effected 
without much trouble and risk, the chief captain determined 
to seek a harbour where they might disembark without 
trouble, and went in his boat with Afonso Dalboquerq^uo 
along the shore, and found a creek near a palm-grove where 
the sea was more quiet, and although it was. a little too far, 
they agreed to land there, and returned to the ships. And the 
chief captain immediately informed all the captains that they 
must get ready to go and attack the fortress before break of 
day, and disembark pt that part by the palm grove, as the 
sea formed no convenient landing in the harbour wherein 
they were anchored, although it was nearer. When the great 
Afonso Dalboquerque came on board his ship, he ordered his 
nephew D. Afonso de Noronha to make ready his boat with 
forty musquoteers, and take with him a falconet and powder 
for it, and cannon balls, and two bombardiers, and fkcahria,^ 
and two sets of ladders to scale the wall of the fortress if 
necessary; and he would go in the ship^s skiff with D. 
Antonio de Noronha, D. Jo9;0 de Lima, and D. Geronimo 
de Lima his brother, and other Fidalgos, following close 
upon their track. 

All being ready, Afonso Dalboquerque went on board 
the flagship, and all made their way at- once towards 
the palm grove, the chief captain with all his fleet in the 
vanguard, and Afonso Dalboquerque with his captains 
and men in the rear. The latter, however, perceiving 
that the sea there in the harbour was abating, and that 
he conld disembark in front of the fortress as it was nearer, 
let his ship drop slowly down along the shore, paddling the 
oars upon the water, to see if the sea would clear up. 
When the captain of the fortress, who was watching to see 
our plan, perceived that the chief captain was going to 
occupy the palm-grove, where he had already a strong 

1 A veasd used for placing masts in ships, and for keeping men pressed 
for senrioe in India.— In this passage it signifies a derrick. 



48 


COMMXMTAIII.iSS OF 


stockade^ which he had made daring all that night, he sallied 
oat of the fortress with a hundred men, and went straight 
to the stockade, to prevent oar landing. As soon as Afonso 
Dalboqaerqae saw the captain leaving the fortress, and the 
sea abating, he ordered D. Afonso de Noronha to pat 
into shore opposite it, and land at once, and he would 
follow him, and all landed together. But the captain, who 
was on his way to attack the chief captain, seeing that Afonso 
Dalboqaerqae remained behind him, and fearing lest he 
should take the gate of the fortress, and he himself have 
no place of retreat, left eighty men with a captain to defend 
the stockade, and he himself with twenty in his company re- 
turned to assist at the gate, lest it should be taken, and 
happened to fall in with D. Afonso de Noronha, who was 
on his way with his men towards it. And when these met 
there was a sharp skirmish with cutlasses and lances, and 
some of either party were wounded. And D. Afonso de 
Noronha engaged in fight with the captain, and coming to 
blows with cutlasses, had almost overcome him, when 
Afonso Dalboqaerqae came up with all the rest of his men 
and put an end to his life. When the Fartaquins beheld 
the death of their captain, they turned and fled away towards 
the fortress, and when they arrived our men killed eight of 
them, while the others went round the fortress and fled to 
the mountains. The Moors, who were upon a watch-tower, 
seeing our men close to the wall, began to throw down 
many comer pieces and stones, which harassed them much. 
And they struck Afonso Dalboquerque on the helmet with 
a corner-stone, so that he immediately fell to the ground 
in bad plight ; but for all this he did not lose his senses, 
and ordered the men to close round, and senjb Nuno Vaz de 
Castelo-branco to the boat to bring the shot and the derrick, 
and the sets of ladders, axes, and rams to break down the 
doors of the fortress. When Nuno Vaz brought the ladder, 
Afonso Dalboquerque ordered them to place it against the 



AFONSO DALSOQUERQUE. 


49 


wall^ and our men began to ascend, and the first was 
Gaspar Dias de Alcacere do Sal, who took up his flag, and 
Nuno Yaz de Castelo-branco, and the standard of Job 
Queimado and others who followed it. The Moors, seeing 
themselves invaded by us, without their being able to prevent 
it, gathered themselves into a tower which was close to the 
principal one; and when they deserted the watch-tower, 
Afonso Dalboquerque ordered the gates to be broken down 
with axes and rams, and all entered in by an earthwork, 
and went to the tower gate, where the Moors had gathered 
themselves, and then waited for the arrival of the chief 
captain who now returned with the Moors. 


CHAPTER XVI. 

% 

How the chief captain, TriatSo da Gunha, entered the fortress, and 
what took place when he arrived there. 

The chief captain, TristSo da Cunha, by the palm-grove 
whither he went to disembark, had some slight difficulty 
with the Moors, who stoutly opposed his landing; but it 
was of little avail for them, because he fell upon them with 
such fury and force that they made but little resistance, 
and quitting the stockade, fled away towards the gate of the 
fortress, the chief captain following up behind them with his 
men, and killing many of them; and those who remained 
alive, seeing themselves cut off by Afonso Dalboquerque, 
who had already got in, turned round behind the fortress 
and saved themselves in the mountains. The chief captain, 
entering by the gate in the court-yard, found Afonso Dalbo- 
qnerque at the foot of the tower, wherein the Moors were 
collected ; and on his arrival he dispatched Nuno Yaz de 
Castelo-branco with four or five men to go and see if he 
could find entrance on any side to get up into it. And at 
the head of the courtyard they found a stone staircase, which 



50 


COMMENTARIES OF 


was the entry to the tower, and going up by it, they came 
out upon the terrace of the tower, and there found a door 
which led to the lower story, which the Moors had barred 
in such a manner that no one could get in, and from the 
middle story, where they were, they kept shooting arrows 
with bad effect upon onr men. The Fidalgos, who were 
there, perceiving themselves severely attacked by the Moors 
without being, able to do them any injury in return, deter- 
mined to risk an assault upon the door, in order to get in to 
them. And the first who attacked it was Don Antonio de 
Noronha ; but when he would have gone up, a Moor came 
upon him with a sword, and would have cut his throat, had 
not Afonso Dalboquerque, happening to see the attempt, 
warded off the blow with his shield. The Moors, perceiving 
themselves invaded by the upper way of the terrace, retreated 
to the principal tower by a stairway, which led from one to 
the other, there not being at this time more than twenty- 
five in the fortress out of a hundred and fifty at the begin- 
ning of the attack, for the others were either dead or fled to 
the mountains. When they had retreated to the principal 
tower, they barred the doors and kept quiet, but the chief 
captain ordered it to be broken open immediately with rams ; 
yet, because the stairway was so narrow that only one at a 
time could ascend by it, and the Moors could easily defend 
it, the chief captain desired, in order that they might not 
kill any of our men when entering this tower, to offer them 
terms. He thereupon told Afonso Dalboquerque and the 
other captains that those Moors were so obstinate, and our 
men so eager to kill them, that it would cost much time and 
trouble to get in at them ; so it would be advisable to let 
them go without hindrance, for even if they were to kill all 
of them, no more honour would accrue to them than that 
they had already gained in taking the fortress. And because 
what the chief captain said was well received by all, he sent 
forthwith for Gaspar Bodriguez, the interpreter, to parley 



AFONSO DALBOQUERQUE. 


61 


with the Moors at the door of the tower^ and tell them their 
captain was dead^ as indeed they well knew, and all those of 
his company, and that they were left alone; therefore he 
earnestly entreated them that they would think right to 
change their opinion and quit the fortress, and he would 
give them a safe conduct and passage for them to go to 
their land. The Moors replied that they were much obliged 
to the worthy chief captain for wishing to spare their lives, 
but that, in telling them of their captain's death, he had 
given them a sufficient reason for declining to receive the 
favour, for the Fartaquins were not accustomed to return 
alive to their land, and leave their captain dead on the field, 
especially when he was the son of their king, .therefore he 
might do as he pleased, for they were not going to yield. 

The chief captain, at this declaration of the Moors, sent 
Jo&o Freire, his page, and Nuno Yaz de Castelo-branco, and 
Dinis Fernandes, who was afterwards Chief Superintendent 
of India, Antonio Dinis de Setubal, and Pedralvares, page of 
the Count of Abrantes, to ascend to the terrace of the tower 
and see if by that way they could get in at the Moors. And 
the first who went up was JoSo Freire, who, when leaping 
from the parapet of the tower to the terrace, was perceived 
by them, and they opened the door which led to the terrace, 
and seeing him by himself, fell upon him and killed him, and 
while they were killing him the others arrived. As soon as 
the Moors perceived them, they returned to their retreat in 
the story where they had been, and barred the door ; and 
our men, seeing that they could not follow the Moors, made 
a hole in the terrace of the tower, and threw down stones and 
bricks which they took thence, and Nuno Yaz de Castelo- 
branco began to do them some injuiy with a cross-bow he 
had taken with him. Afonso Dalboqnerque, excited with 
the shame they all incurred for having been, there three 
hours without being able to enter a tower defended by four 
Moors, ordered two Biscay palisadoes to be brought from 



52 


COMHENTABIBS OF 


his boat^ and under the protection of these, carried by two 
soldiers, they began to monnt bravely to the top of the 
stairway, those who could find room, and all the others 
followed them, being well plied with arrows and lances 
hurled at them. Even this, however, availed the defenders 
nothing to prevent our men from entering, and those who 
were upon the top of the terrace, when they saw the dis- 
turbance going on in the story, and the little door unpro- 
tected, broke it down and went down the stairway, and both 
one and the other party got in pell-mell among the Moors, 
and killed all without one escaping, and this at the cost of 
five or six of us killed and many Wounded. One Moor, indeed, 
who surrendered, was taken prisoner, and of him Afonso Dal- 
boqnerque made much use on the Arabian coast, whither he 
went, for this Moor was a great pilot for that coast, and 
gave him a chart of all those parts of the kingdom of Ormuz, 
which a pilot, who was called Omar, when going thither had 
made, in whose company this man had sailed as mariner. 
The fortress was attacked at six o'clock in the morning, and 
finally taken at one o'clock in midday. Not much spoil was 
taken in it, for the Moors were of the frontier, but some 
supplies and arms were found, and swords bearing in Latin 
the inscription, God help me." This victory having been 
won, on the morning of the next day the chief captain went 
with all the men in procession to a Moorish mosque ; and as 
it was to be the principal church, they named it Our Lady 
of the Victory”, wherein Pr. Antonio do Lonreiro, of the 
Order of St. Francis, said mass, and not without the tears of 
our men, to behold in a land so remote from Portugal the 
name of our Lord Jesus Christ reverenced in that house of 
abomination. 



AVONBO DAIiBOQDERQUB. 


53 


CHAPTER XVIL 

Of tbe message which the chief captain, TristSo da Cunha, sent to the 
people of the land, and what passed with them, and how he finished 
the fortress of Qocotora, and sailed for India ; and how the great 
Afonso Dalboquerqne became chief captain of the fieet. 

When the chief captain^ Trist&o da Cunha^ was in posses- 
sion of the fortress^ he ordered a verbal proclamation to 
be made to the Christians^ who had fled away from a colony 
close by, entreating them to return, and give themselves no 
uneasiness, nor be scandalised at the destruction with which 
he had visited the Moors ; for the principal reason of the 
King of Portugal's sending him to take that fortress and 
drive the Moors from the island, was to free them from these 
men's power, on account of the information which he had 
that they who dwelt there were Christians. Directly the 
natives received this message from the chief captain, know- 
ing that his men were Christians, they came and cast them- 
selves at his feet (having already thrown off the fear they 
formerly had), giving him many thanks for the favour he 
had done them in liberating them from the thraldom of the 
Fartaquins, who so tormented them that, not content with 
being lords over all their possessions, they had even taken 
away their wives and children to make Moors of them, and 
had done them many other injuries; but since God had 
brought him thither, and all were Christians, they begged 
he would deign to protect and defend them from such a bad 
set as these Moors were. The chief captain, with many 
loving words, consoled them, saying that the King of Portu- 
gal, his lord, had sent him thither out of love for them, and 
that he might make a fortress for their safety in that island, 
and that a captain.and soldiera might be stationed there to 
defend them from the Fartaquins and ships of the Moors, 
who passed by thither to the straits (not knowing that the 



54 


COMMENTARIES OF 


Fartaquins had already made one), and begged them and 
recommended them especially ever to keep the peace and 
friendship with the Portuguese, and chiefly with those who 
were to stay behind in the fortress, and supply them with 
the • supplies they might require. And since they were 
Christians, he begged they would kindly receive the doctrine 
of Christ, and learn the ceremonies of our Church, which 
they had already long ago forgotten, for the King of Portu- 
gal, his lord, with the desires he had of their salvation, 
ordered the Padre Fr. Antonio, who was there present with 
other religious men, to instruct them. This and much more 
to the point the chief caj^tain said to them, whereat they be- 
came very happy, and promised him they would do all that 
he ordered ; and from there they went with the Padre Fr. 
Antonio to their churches, where many, by his preaching 
and good example, were baptised. 

This done, the chief captain ordered great quantities of 
stone and mortar to be collected, and set about the building 
of the fortress at once, and made such haste about it that 
in a short time it was finished; and when it was complete he 
named it " St. Michael”, and committed the captainship of 
it to D. Afonso de Noronha, who came from Portugal, ap- 
pointed by the king, D. Manoel, and he made FernSLo 
Jacome, his brother-in-law, the chief alcaide (constable). 
And as the time for his departure to India was drawing 
near, he handed over to Afonso Dalboquerque six ships 
which the king, D. Manoel, had ordered to. be given to 
him, with men, supplies, artillery, and all the rest that was 
necessary for him to remain as chief captain of all those 
parts (as the king’s order constituted him), with obligations 
to provide that fortress with whatever it might require ; of 
which ships the captains Were Francisco de Tavora of the 
Bey Orande, Manuel Telez of the little one, Afonso Lopes 
da Costa of the Taforea, and Antonio do Campo of the small 
ship. And because the Comendador Buy Soares, was to 



AFONSO DALBOQUERQUE. 


55 


remain in his company^ but had not yet arrived, the chief 
captain, TristSLo da Gunhc^ left JoSLo da Nova, captain of the 
Flor de la Mar^ in his stead, and as soon as Buy Soares 
arrived, he was to sail away at once to India, with news of 
what Afonso Dalboquerque had done on the coast of Arabia, 
to take word to the king, D. Manoel. All this having 
been brought to an end, the chief captain took leave of the 
captain of the fortress, and of Afonso Dalboquerque, and 
of all the Fidalgos and knights who remained there (aud 
thin not without many tears on either side), and shaped his 
course for India with four ships on the first of August, in 
the year *7, an^ arrived there in safety, and there took 
in cargo and started to Portugal.^ 

Afonso Dalboquerque began to turn his attention to 
the afiairs of the land, and divided the palm-groves, 
Svhich the Moors had there, among the native Christians, 
and those which belonged to the mosque he now gave to the 
churches. And after the departure of Afonso Dalboquerque 

' Here, for a while, we lose sight of this celebrated navigator. The 
Syren of Gamoes sings truly of him : — 

Mas oh que luz tainanha, quo abrir sin to, 

Dizia a nympha, e a voz alevantava, 

Ul no mar de Melinde em sangue tinto * 

Das cidades de Lamo, de Oja, e Brava, 

Pelo Cunha tambem : qtte nunca extinio 
8tr&, seu name em todo o mar^ que lava 
As llhas do Austro, e praias que se chamam 
De SSo-Louren^o, e em todo o Sul se affamam.” 

Luiiada^ x, 39, 

^^01 what new light beginneth there to bud 

(The Siren said, and rais'd her Voyce thereat) 

From the Melimdian sea, dy'd with the blood 
Of Lamo, Ocha, Brava, all laid flat 
By great De Gunia ; who through all the Flood 
Which laves the Southern Idee and Shores (but That 
Of Madagascar chiefly) the wide mouth 
Of Fame shall All, aud threat the unknown South.'' 

FanehaWy p. 2ol. 



56 


COHMENTARIES OF 


to Ormaz^ our people remained in peace and friendship with 
the natives ; bat as the people of the island lire by nature 
very malicious and treacherouSj those Fartaquins who had 
escaped had Very little troubjle to urge them against our 
people^ and arranged with the Christians of the land« who 
lived in these colonies remote from the fortress, to rise up 
against the Portuguese, telling them that the Franks had 
only built that fortress there to enslave them all, and take 
their land from them, and that they ought to revolt and not 
give supplies to the Franks, for it was now niid-winter, and 
not a season for them to be able to live without such supplies, 
and thus they all would perish. And they added that the 
Fartaquins would assist this undertaking, and procure from 
Fartaque many Moors to help them further. The natives, 
believing all this, set themselves to the work, and revolted, 
whence it happened that wars and commotions took place 
between them. And although the time was short, for the 
labour was continual, our people suffered much from famine, 
and from misfortune, until Afonso Dalboquerque returned 
to visit them, and provide them with supplies, according to 
his promise ; and when he arrived, it was some days since 
our people had eaten anything but palm rind, and some 
goats which they took by forc^ of arms. 


CHAPTER XVIII. 

How the great Afonso Dalboquerque, after TristSo da Cunha had sailed, 
made his fleet ready, and saUed with the intention of going to wait 
for the Moorish ships which camp from India to the straitB, and 
what happened thereupon. 

As soon as the great Afonso Dalboquerque had put the 
affairs of the land in order, he wished immediately to set 
about fitting out his fleet, so as to sail at the new moon, 
which would be on the tenth day of August, for this was 



AFONSO DALBOQUEBQUE. 


57 


the time, as the Moorish pilots, whom he had brought from 
Melinde, said^ that he might start for the coast of Arabia. 
So he ordered Pero Yaz Dorta, factor of the fleet, and Jofto 
Estfto, scriFener, to overhaul all the ships, and And out 
what supplies each one had on board, and from the informa- 
tion they acquired he understood that there were only fifteen 
days' supplies on board the fleet. When this was reported 
to Afonso Dalboquerque, he ordered a bread-room to be 
opened which was in his ship, and which he had caused to 
be carefully guarded, when he saw that TristSo da Cunha 
was not managing well in that voyage after he left Portugal, 
being fearful lest the delay should consume all, and he 
ordered the contents to be divided among all the captains, 
Ub himself taking his fair share, as each one of them did, 
for he did not wish that what was wanting to the others 
should abound with himself. When all was ready, and 
waiting the time for starting on the second of the month, 
such a great storm from the south-west struck them that 
all the ships were like to have been overset, and by stress 
of weather they broke all the cables they had, and the Rey 
Orande went nearly out of soundings, but by a miracle one 
cable held her. So Afonso Dalboquerque, finding himself by 
night in this misfortune, was very anxious, as he had not 
arranged with the captains what course they were to take, 
and whither they were to go and wait for him if the ships 
slipped their cables. And at once, in the night, while the 
storm was at its height, he ventured his skiff and wrote to 
the captains, that in case his sins deserved that any ship 
should break cables at that time, it was to make its way to, 
and wait for him at, the Islands of Curia Muria, and there 
all would take counsel respecting the course to be followed. 
And, with this message, he sent to each one a pilot of the 
Moors, whom he brought with him from Melinde. And it 
pleased Our Lord that when morning broke the weather 
cleared up, and the mariners had an opportunity of mend- 



58 


COMMENTARIES OF 


ing their cables. As soon as the day of departure was come^ 
Afonso Dalboquerque summoned the captains and all the 
pilots, both Moors and Christians^ and told them the time 
of setting out was come, and it would be well to discuss the 
route they were to take, whether by the Straits of Meca^ or 
of Ormuz, or whether they should go at once to Dio and 
Cambaia, and in which part of these the fleet could be best 
supplied with supplies ; for there was great need of them. 
These questions being brought before the assembly, and all 
the obstacles which were alleged being removed, it was 
agreed that, with the west winds then blowing, they should 
make for the Straits of Ormuz and take Mazcate, and there 
make up their minds what to do, and in that latitude of 
Qocotora, Fartaque,^ and Dofar,^ cruise about for eight da^s, 
watching the ships which at that season started from Bar- 
bara^ and Zeilo,^ and all the Bed Sea, for Dio and Cambaia, 
and all the ports of Malabar. 

This haying been settled, all the ships set themselves in 
readiness, with their yards set and anchors apeak, and the 
great Afonso Dalboquerque took leave of D. Afonso do 
Noronha, his nephew, captain of the fortress, and of all 
the others who remained in it, and gave him an account 
of his intentions, and also told him the time when he hoped 
to return. And he sailed out of the port of Qoco on the 
tenth of August, in the year fifteen hundred and seven, 
taking the northern course by way of Fartaque and Dofar. 
And while they were in that water, in the narrow part of the 
Straits of the Bed Sea, the wind and haze were so great 
that, not to strain the tackle, they stood a little more off to 

' This appears to be an error for Mokhs, now called the Straits of 
B&b-el-Mandel, The Gate of Grid*’. 

^ Gape Fartak, on the coast of Arabia, 15 deg. 83 min. N., 52 deg. 
10 min. E. 

* Dafar or rather Zafar, near Mirbat, 17 deg. 20 min. N., 54 deg. 
80 min. £. 

* Nearly opposite Aden. 


* For Zeila. 



AFONSO DALBOQUERQUE. 


59 


catch sight of Curia Muria because it was not yet time to 
cruize in that latitude, as had been agreed upon; and 
even if they had sighted any ship, there was neither sea 
nor wind for chasing, by reason of the great danger they 
would run, and also because they were obliged to take this 
route, and much time was lost in it. And, sailing on in open 
order with that wind, on the thirteenth day of the month 
(August) they sighted a high land close to Curia Muria, 
which the Moors call Nooz,‘ and coasted along it until they 
had gone seven leagues from the islands ; and, as the haze 
was very thick, they did not sight them, and it being now 
night, all returned to the open sea, to keep away from land. 
When morning came, they returned to stand in shore, but 
did not see land that day. The pilots made themselves out 
to be off Curia Muria, opposite a coast running N.E. and 
S.W. Afonso Dalboquerque hung out an ensign in his flag, 
and came to speak with them, and told them that in that 
latitude, which they were keeping, he could not be beyond 
Curia Muria; for, sailing by the rhumb of N.E., as they said, 
they would run aground upon the island : and what he said 
was not well received by the captains nor by the pilots, 
and that night they steered north, and he consented to 
obey the desires of the many. And so sailing on the night of 
the eve of Our Lady of August,’ the watch of prime being 
just finished, Antonio do Campo, who was leading the way, 
found himself close in to land, with a strong wind and run- 
ning sea, and fired two guns. As soon as Afonso Dalbo- 
querque heard them, he ordered a signal to be made to the 
ships to turn back into the open sea, and all turned, the 

^ The Bay of Kuria Muria, on the Arabian coast, 17 deg. 80 min. N., 
55 deg. 25 min. £. The island is in the same latitude, and 56 deg. 
0 min. £. longitude. 

* Ras KOs, or, according to Bitter, Bis Koss. 

* This would be the 14th of August, the eve of the Feast of the 
Assumption of the B. V. Mary. 



60 


COMMENTARIES OF 


pilots going on with the sounding lines in their hands; 
until they found they were out of soundings^ and when they 
got there, he ordered them by signal to heave to, and all 
answered him, and he remained that night, with his lantern 
alight, lying to, and all the ships at his stem. 


CHAPTER XIX. 

How the great Afonso Dalboquerque, owing to his great need of sup- 
plies, shaped his coarse for the Straits of Ormuz, and arrived at 
Mascate. 

The night being over, on the morning of the following day 
the great Afonso Dalboquerque sent word to his captains to 
steer straight to land and touch at Qalayate; for, on account 
of the great need of supplies throughout the fleet, he could 
not keep his intention of watching for the ships at that 
point; and also because the Moorish pilots told him that 
they considered that the ships had already gone by since 
the weather had been so bad, that if they had left Aden 
they would have finished their voyage in three days. And, 
with this determination, all steered to land, and three days 
afterwards sighted a point of land, which the Moors call 
Madrica,^ and kept continually coasting along with due pre- 
caution, keeping close to land by day, and by night stand- 
ing out to sea, to make their voyage with greater safety, 
until they came in sight of the Cape of Maceiras.’ And, as 
they were coming one morning from the sea to the coast, 
the Moorish pilots did not recognise it; for some made 
themselves out to be on this side of the Cape of Resalgate,^ 
and others on the farther aide, and they were perplexed to 

^ Madrica, elsewhere Madraka, now Cape Isolette. 

* Perhaps now Baa el Jezirah, forming the lower point of the Gulf 
of Massera : hut this point is the same as Madraka. 

> Perhaps lias el Had, 22 deg. 24 min. N., 59 deg. 49 min. £. 



AFONSO DALBOQUERQUE. 


61 


find the currents there very rapidly setting in towards the 
Straits of Ormuz : but^ as the sea was calm and the wind 
improving every moment^ the Moorish pilots ordered the 
ships to be drawn up as close as possible to the shore, and 
anchored in from twenty-five to fourteen fathoms of water ; 
for^ although the coast is full of hidden rocksj it is clear, 
and afibrds good anchorage : and all this land near the sea 
is barren and sandy, and the interior has very lofty and 
^tigged mountain ranges. As soon as the Moorish pilots 
arrived here, they at once knew they were on this side of 
the Cape of Besalgate, and at the Maceira point. The fleet 
remained at anchor there that night; and when morning 
broke, the ship TaforAi, which was on the weather beam, 
fired two shots, and some went up the round top imme- 
diately to see what it was, and the man on th.e look-out said 
he saw three sAils on the sea. Then Afonso Dalboquerque 
sent word to Antonio do Campo and Manoel Telez to set 
sail and see what those sails were : and, in case they should 
lose sight of the fleet, he told them to coast along, and they 
would find him at the Cape of Besalgate, for the Moorish 
pilot he carried knew the coast very well. 

The two captains having started, Afonso Dalboquerque 
ordered the other ships to sail, and they anchored that day in 
the afternoon on this side of the Cape of Besalgate, which is 
a coast well shaded and clear, and of good anchorage ; and 
while they were there, Antonio do Campo and Manoel 
Telez arrived with the intelligence that the ships which the 
look-out man saw were three fishing barques; but with the 
sea air they had seemed large sails; and, as the wind had 
dropped, they fled away by sailing and rowing. And they 
found there, in that port where they were that night, thirty 
or forty fishing ships, which come thither from the City of 
Ormuz,^ Calayate, and all that coast to fish for boniios'^ and 

’ See plan and deecription of Ormuz, in Resende’s work, if. 155-158. 

* A kind of tiiiniy. — Blutean. 



62 


C0MMENTAB1B8 OF 


Albecoras;' for there is great tra£Bc in these fish to many 
parts, just as in the tunny of Algarve ; and they burned all 
these ships, and on the following morning set sail with a 
fair wind, and took the ships* boats with masts and sails, 
and towards evening arrived at the mouth of a large i*iver 
which formed a great lagoon within it. And Afonso Dalbo- 
querque ordered the master of the Taforda to go in his 
boat along the shore, and see what sort of a place it was, 
and of what depth the river was; and he found five fathoms 
depth, and the water of the lake salt. Within it were four 
small zamhucos, which they burned. From this point they 
kept coasting along, with sunken rocks, at twenty or twenty- 
five fathoms, and a clear bottom, until they arrived at a 
small village of straw huts, which the Moorish pilots said 
belonged to the fishermen, and by land along the coast went 
much people on foot or horse or camel, pacing along and 
following our fieet, which kept along the bank until in 
sight of the City of Galayate. And when just opposite the 
harbour, Afonso Dalboquerque ordered the captains to set 
their mainsails and be ready to sail, and to deck out the 
ships with flags and get all their artillery in order, and 
with their foresails and mizensails, and taking their boats 
up in front, to go and anchor in front of the city, and all did 
so with great pleasure and many cheers, but without sound- 
ing trumpets, for Trist&o da Gunha had refused to give 
them any. 


GHAPTBR XX. 

Of what the great Afonso Dalboqaerqae transacted with the governors 
of the city of Galayate on his arrival there. 

As soon as the great Afonso Dalboquerque had arrived 
with his fleet at Galayate,* they employed all that afternoon 

> Evidently an Arabic word, cf. al-b&kara, al-bfikUra, an oz, or a 
cow. Yieyra calls this fish a kind of tunny. 

* Kalhat, between Bas-el-Hadd and Mu^kat. 



AFONSO DALBOQUEBQUE. 


63 


in repairing their ships ; and^ on the following morning, he 
sent a boat to shore, and in it Pero Vaz Dorta, factor of the 
fleet, and Jofto Estfto, scrivener, and Gaspar Bodrignes, in- 
terpreter. When they landed, the Moors, who at once 
collected on the beach, questioned them as to what they 
required and whence they had come. And Pero Vaz Dorta 
replied, through the interpreter, that the fleet before them 
belonged to the king D. Manoel, King of Portugal and Lord 
of the Indies, and that the chief captain, who came with it, 
desired to know what place this was, and of what kingdom 
and lordship. The Moors replied, that the name of the city 
was Calayate, and that it belonged to the kingdom of 
Ormuz, and if they required anything they would give it 
very willingly ; and, with this reply which the Moors gave, 
Pero Vaz Doi*ta and Jofto Bstfto returned, and acquainted 
Afonso Dalboquerque with what had taken place. On the 
following morning the GoaziP and rulers of the city sent 
him word to send two of his men to land ; for they wished 
to send two of their men to confer with him. Afonso Dalbo- 
querque sent two of his young men, and two honourable 
Moors came from land, and informed him on the part of the 
Goazil and rulers of the city, that whatever was required for 
his fleet they would willingly cause to be sent to him ; for 
they desired to have peace and friendship 'with the King of 
Portugal, and they brought him a present of oranges, lemons, 
pomegranates, and fowls, and some iheep; but, because, 
for all these g^od words and the presents, much people 
were continually marching along the beach and through the 
city, armed and clothed like Turks, with bows, lances, 
swords, and dmitars (and on the bank they had a stockade 
with four mortars^, Afonso Dalboquerque declined receiving 
the present, saying that he would not accept anything from 
those against whom he would have to declare war if they 
refused to be vassals of the King of Portugal, whose chief 
« Or Guaril, a ||;oyemor, from the Arabic waair. Cf. Alguazil, Sp. 



61 


COMMENTARIES OF 


captain he was^ sent by royal command to the kingdom and 
city of Ormuz.^ The Moors replied^ that if he was on his 
way to Ormaz, this place was the door to it^ and if he 

■ CamSes makes the nymph utter the following prophetic sentiments, 
concerning the operations of Dalhoquerque at Ormus and Calayate : — 
“ Esta luz he do fogo, e das luzentes 
Armas, com que Albuquerque ird amansando 
De Ormuz os Parseos, por seu mal yalentes, 

Que refusam o jugo honroso, e brando : 

Alii yerSo as Bellas estridentes 
Reciprocarse, a ponta no ar yirando 
Contra quern as tirou ; que De^ peleja 
Por quern estende a f^ da madre Igreja. 

AUi de sal os montes nSo defendem 
De corrupt os coipos no combate, 

Que, mortos, pela prala, e mar se estendem 
De Gerum, de Mascate, e CiJayate : 

At6 que k forca sd de bra^o apprendem 
A abaixar a ceryiz, onde se Ihe ate 
Obriga 9 §k> de dar o reino inico 
Das perlas de Barem tribute rico.*’ 

Lunada, z, 40, 41. 

I forbear to giye Mickle’s incorrect rendering of these stanzas ; Fan- 
shaw translates them thus : — 

‘‘This light is of those flames and glitt’ring Arms 
Wherewith the stubborn Persians of Ormuzx, 

Spuming the yoaie, and yaliant to their harms, 

Fierce Albuquerque afterwards subdues. 

There shall be hissing Shafts (like living swarms) 

Turned in the Ayre, their shooters* Helmets bruize ; 

That they may see, with eyes though ne’n so dim, 

Uow God will flght f<»r Them that fight for ATtm. 

“The Mountains then of Salt will not be able 
To keep those Bodies from corruption. 

Which on the Coasts shall lye out (miserable) 

Of Galayat^ Mascate, and Gerun ; 

Until the easie yoake and honorable 

They learn (with all their fierceness) to put on : 

Forc’t by the Conquerours^ to pay to them 
Rich Tribute of their Pearles of Baherkm.** 



AFONSO DALBOQUEBQUE. 


G5 


treated them well they would open it for him, and he could 
BO enter the house, and since he was determined to go and 
visit the King of Ormuz^ their Lord^ he might make some 
agreement with him, but if no agreement were made, they 
would agree to be subject to the King of Portugal, and 
as his vassals they desired he would not desire to destroy 
them nor make war upon them. Afonso Dalboquerque 
ordered the captains to be summoned, and recounted this 
reply to them, which the rulers of the city had sent him, 
and it was unanimously agreed that if these men were 
willing to supply all the stores necessary for the fleet, from 
the great need there was of such, he ought to dissemble and 
give them a respite until he arrived at Ormuz, making a 
virtue of necessity, until he obtained his supplies. 

This having been decided, Afonso Dalboquerque dis- 
patched the Moors back with a fitting answer : and, as the 
rulers were very desirous of peace, from the fear they had of 
our fleet, being unprepared, they sent the Moors back again 
at once with sixty bags^ of rice, and as many of dates, and 
thirty sheep, and other fresh provisions. But, as Afonso 
Dalboquerque did not know how affairs at Ormuz would 
turn out, he would receive nothing in the way of a present, 
and ordered payment to be made for all that was brought. 
The Moors were unwilling to receive payment, saying that 
the present which the rulers of the city had sent him was 
for a sign of friendship ; for all were prepared to do what- 
ever he might order, and therefore they could not take any 
payment; and if the King of Ormuz were unwilling to 
make peace, then they would render the city up to him. 
Nevertheless, Afonso Dalboquerque made them^by force 
take payment, and ordered a safeguard to be made out 
for them in the name of the king, D. Manoel, to hold good 
until his arrival at Ormuz. And because this safeguard did 

> FardoM. A fardo in India was equivalent to 42 pounds Portuguese. 
— Vieyra. 



66 


COMHENTARISS OF 


not cover the ships of strangers who were in the port^ he 
ordered a ship of Aden^ of about two hundred tons^ which 
was there loading horses and dates, to be seized. When 
the master of the vessel perceived that his ship was taken, 
he applied to the Goazil, who was the governor of the city, 
begging him to do what he could to prevent his ship being 
carried off, and the Goazil sent word to Afonso Dalboquer- 
que that, for the honour of the city he begged he would be 
graciously pleased to send back the ship, and he would give 
whatever he ordered. But Afonso Dalboquerque put him 
off with the excuse that he had given it to Gaspar Rodri- 
gues, the interpreter, and if he chose to ransom it of him, 
well and good ; he, for his part, was sorry it was out of his 
power to serve him, though he would send him to come to 
some agreement with the present owner of the ship. So 
Gaspar Rodrigues arranged with the master, and gave the 
price to the factor for expenses of the fleet. 

Calayate is a city as large as Santarem, badly populated, 
with many old edifices, now destroyed. According to the 
information given to Afonso Dalboquerque by the Moors, 
it appears that the city was destroyed by Alexander, who 
conquered all that country. The sea beats against it, and 
the harbour is very good, and is situated at the foot of some 
lofty ranges; on the land side, a little distance from the 
city, there was a wall about the height of a lance, which 
comes down from the top of the mountains, and reaches to 
the sea; this was made by the citiaens out of love for 
[peseii with} the Moors of the interior, for they had come 
into collision with them on several occasions. The interior 
is under the rule of a king who is called the Benjabar, who 
has much cavalry. Around the city there is not a single 
tree, except a few palms close to some pools of water, whence 
they get drink ; and all their supplies of com, barley, maize, 
millet^ and dates, come firom the interior, for there is plenty 
of these products there. This port is a great entrepAt 



AFONSO DALBOQUBBQUE. 


67 


of shipping, which comes thither to take horses and dates 
to India. The King of Ormuz used to send there every 
year a noble Moor to be Goazil, who administered justice 
and made war and peace as he chose. And in the taxes and 
duties paid to the king, no one interfered except an eunuch, 
a servant of Gogeatar, and in all the places under the King- 
dom of Ormuz he placed these eunuchs, his servants, who 
had charge of the revenue, and great obedience was shown 
to them throughout the land. 


CHAPTER XXL 

How the c^eat Afonso Dalboqneiqae left the city of Calayate, and 
went on to Cnriate,* and took it by force of arma 

The supplies having been collected, the great Afonso 
Dalboqnerque took his leave of the Moors, who kept to 
the agreement he had made with them, and started from 
the port on Sunday, the twenty-second of August, always 
keeping in sight of the coast, with the determination to leave 
no place in the whole of the land ignorant of what he could do 
to it ; for he held it a most important part in his plan for 
getting possession of Ormuz, first to make himself master 
of all those places and ports which he might find along the 
coast, and to bum all their ships to prevent their assisting 
the king. And g^ing along thus within sight of land, he 
told the Moorish pilots that he had a chart, made by a 
Moorish pilot named Omar, when he accompanied Yioente 
Sodr^, and containing all the harbours, towns, and places 
of that coasts and in it was set down that five leagues from 
Calayate there was a port called loce, and he desired they 

1 A little aouib of Musoat. See end daaoriptioii in Reiende*i 
work, ff. 118-115, Deicripnm da lortallesa de Goiiate qne he a 
Pritf^yra do Esferpjio de Ormna Antea de Maacate.** 

r2 



68 


COHMENTABIES OF 


would point it out to him^ thinking it was a large place. So 
the pilots showed it to him, and it proved to be a river of 
fresh water, in which the ships entering the Straits of 
Ormuz go and take water, and our fleet passed in sight of 
it ; and when close to Guriate they anchored rather far from 
laud, as it was all low rocks, and Afonso Dalboquerque 
ordered Manoel Telez and Antonio do Campo to approach 
as close as they could to the land, bearing in mind to make 
allowance for the low tide, for it was then on the turn ; and 
when they were anchored, they set themselves in sailing 
order and hung out all their flags, remaining there all that 
night, without any one coming from land to speak with 
them. So when they had consulted together as to what 
they should do, although different opinions were advanced, 
it was agreed to destroy the place. But as it was large, not .to 
proceed blindly to attack it, the great Afonso Dalboquerque 
made up his mind to go along with his captains and recon- 
noitre the place, and settle the manner in whidi they should 
disembark, and they entered the captains' boats and steered 
for the rivfiT. When they came close to it, the Moors, who 
lined the beach, would not have any communication with 
them, and began to make many hostile gestures ; and they 
had made at that part a stockade of wood, flve palms in 
breadth, and packed in with earth, which guarded all the 
front of the place, and within it were placed four large 
mortars, and many archers, and others with long lances, 
guarding it. And lower down than this, they had made 
another on the edge df the water in shape of a bastion, 
surrounded with wood, and packed up with earth, of the 
same size as the other, and at high water it was entirely 
surrounded by water ; for between the fort and the village 
was a creek or backwater, in which there were two gates, 
one opposite to the other, for them to assemble whenever it 
was necessary. When Afonso Dalboquerque beheld the 
stockade, and saw that the Moors were unwilling to com- 



AFONSO DALBOQUEBQUE. 


69 


muaicate wifch bnt were determined to make a bold 
stand in their own defence^ he ordered the falconets which 
were in his boat to be fired at them^ and retired to the ships. 
The Moors also^ on their part^ began to fire at him with 
their mortars^ and with many arrows. And becanse in this 
harbour there is a small island^ so close to the land that at 
low water one can pass over dryshod to the place^ and the 
Moors could not prevent the disembarking of our people 
for all the force they had there^ Afonso Dalboquerquo 
ordered Antonio do Campo to go at once^ that very nighty 
with a hundred men^ to take this island and fortify himself 
therein. 

All this haying been set in order, at the appointed time 
the captains came in their boats on board the fiagship to set 
out thence all together^ and because just (hen. the tide 
was at its lowest ebb, Afonso Dalboquerque determined to 
disembark somewhat below the town^ that our men might 
reach land with less danger from the mortars at the stockades, 
and told his captains this, his [altered] plan, that each one 
might be aware of what he was about to do. And having 
arrived at the island wherein Antonio do Campo was posted, 
Afonso Dalboquerque changed his mind, and desired to 
attack the stations at that point with all his men in one 
battalion, as it was too small to be divided into two; for if 
he gained that fort wherein the Moors had all their strength 
and trust, the others, which were on the other side of the 
town, would yield without fighting. And this being so 
arranged, he told Antonio do Campo to be on the watch 
for him, and at the moment when he should attack the 
station, to attack the other side with all his men facing it, 
and fight fiercely with the Moors, for he hoped in Our Lord 
to overcome them, and thereby get possession of the city. 
So Antonio do Campo knowing what he was to do, Afonso 
Dalboquerque went along the river to disembark at the other 
part whei*e he hod agreed upon, and with all his people went 



70 


COMMENTARIES OF 


oa his way softly^ and when close upon the station^ a number 
of Moors came in view^ who proceeded from the other side 
of a hill which overlooked the place, as though about to 
attack our men in flank. When Afonso Dalboquerque saw 
them, he sent Afonso Lopez da Costa, with sixty men, to go 
and take the hill for him and drive them down and return 
at once to the main body. Afonso Lopez da Costa attacked 
these Moors very bravely and worsted them, killing some, 
and returned forthwith to our men, and all together assaulted 
the stockade. Antonio do Campo, who was in momentary 
expectation of what Afonso Dalboquerque had told him, 
seeing our men fighting *in the stockade, attacked the rear 
of the Moors, at the part where he had received instructions 
to fall on. The Moors, being attacked in front by our men, 
began to fire their artillery and many arrows, defending 
themselves for a long while, and wounded some soldiers of 
the company led by Antonio do Campo. When this furious 
artillery fire was over, our men fell on with such eagerness 
that, fighting on the top of the stockades, they entered with 
the Moors into the place, and pursued them for the distance 
of half a league, putting to the sword all the Moors, women 
and children, who were fleeing into the interior. And be- 
cause the heat was great and our men by this time were 
very tired, Afonso Dalboquerque took a hill, and set up his 
standard, and remained there, sending word to Francisco 
de Tavora, Afonso Lopez da Costa, and Antonio do Campo, 
that when they saw it they should likewise set up their 
flags, at distances from each other, to restrain the men from 
following up the Moors ; and he also ordered Jofto da Nova 
and Manuel Teles to return to the place, and collect all the 
people who were scattered up and down in it, and finding 
some Moors, he put them all to the sword, and remained on 
that hill until vespers. And when he had collected all the 
men, he proceeded to the town, and ordered them to repair 
the stockades of the Moors, and fortified himself in them 



AFONSO DALBOQUEKQUE. 


71 


until the supplies had been collected^ for there was great 
need of them ; and he ordered his flag to be set up on the 
dome of the mosque^ and ten men to be placed there to 
watch the surrounding country. And as soon as the sup- 
plies were collected, and as much spoil as they could carry 
away, he ordered the place to be set on fire, especially some 
houses in whidh the bulk of the supplies were, to prevent 
the Moors from making use of them ; and the fire was so 
fierce that there was not a house, not a building, nor the 
mosque, which was one of the most beautiful ever seen, left 
standing. He ordered also that they should cut off the ears 
and noses of the Moors who were captured there, ^d then 
send them away to Ormuss to bear witness to their disgrace. 
In this place we captured twenty-five pieces of artillery and 
a great quantity of bows, arrows, lances, and other arms ; 
and thirty-eight ships, great and small, were burned. When 
this was all over, Jie returned with all the captains to the 
ships, and each went to his own to make ready for the 
passage to Mascate on the following day. 

Curiate is a large town, having its principal population 
on the edge of the coast on the inner side ; it is rather 
straggling, and contained to all appearance about five or six 
thousand men. It is an entrepdt of many ships which come 
to export dates, of which both in the town and neighbouring 
country there is abundance; but because the harbour is 
rather rocky, and the sea runs with a strong current, they 
do not export horses, although many are bred in the land. 
There are very good pools of water which the inhabitants 
use for drinking purposes. Two veiy large ships were 
burned, which were on the stocks, all in repair and order 
to be launched; they belonged to a corsair who lived in 
the place. 



72 


COMMENTARIES OF 


CHAPTER XXII. 

How the great Afonso Dalboquerque set sail from Curiate and went to 
Mascate, and what passed there. 

When day broke, the great Afonso Dalboqnerqne ordered 
all the fleet to set sail, and in four days they arrived at the 
city of Mascate,^ which is the principal port for all that 
coast ; and on that day in the evening all the ships entered 
the port, with the exception of those of Manuel Teles and 
Francisco de Tavora, which remained outside because the 
breeze dropped. Directly they were all anchored, there 
came on board the flagship two noble Moors in an almadia^ 
and as they were already aware of the destruction of Curiate, 
they told Afonso Dalboquerque that the rulers of the city 
had sent them to beg him to do it no injury, for they were 
willing to be vassals of the King of Portugal. Afonso 
Dalboquerque asked them whether they brought with them 
authority from the rulers and people of the city to treat. 
To this the Moors replied that they had not brought any 
written instructions, but it was sufficient that they were 
come thither according to order of the city; so he told 
them he could not make any answer until the two of his 
captains who remained outside had first come into port, but 
they might return to shore, and on the following morning 
return safely to him, and he would arrange with them all 
that the service of the King of Portugal, Lord of the Indies, 
required. The Moors being gone with this reply, now that 
Francisco de Tavora and Manuel Telez had come in, Afonso 
Dalboquerque ordered both of them to take boat and sound 
the harbour, how many fathoms depth there was between 
the ships and the shore, and to try to get a view of the 
position of the stockade which the Moors had made ; and 

^ 28 d^. 29 min. N., 58 deg. 88 min. E. See plan and description of 
the fortress in Kesende’s work, ff. 116-128. 



AFONSO DALBOQUERQUE. 


iTO 

they went along the shore, after having sounded the bottom, 
and saw all very well So having returned to the ships, 
they told him that the Moors had constructed in front of 
the town a wall of timber ten palms broad and twenty high, 
packed with earth, very strong, and on either side it had 
been carried up into two very high mountain ranges, which 
ran down into the sea, and made the whole very strong ; 
and in this wall they had made some defences, like bulwarks, 
with many mortars of the size of our camelos^ mounted on 
them, and that we could land at the foot of the wall at high 
tide. While Afonso Dalboquerque was discussing this with 
Francisco de Tavora and Manuel Telez, the two Moors, who 
had come the day before, came on board, with permit of the 
Bulers to treat for peace, and told him that the city desired 
to be obedient to the King of Portugal, and«per£brm what- 
ever he, the chief captain, might order on his part. Afonso 
Dalboquerque, after hearing what they had to say, ordered 
them out while he communed with the captains who were 
then with him, respecting the agreement to bo made with 
the envoys, and having settled what reply to make, he called 
the Moors in and told them, that if the city was willing to 
obey the King of Portugal, and pay him yearly a fair and 
reasonable tribute, and supply himself with all supplies he 
might require when he arrived at Ormuz, he on his part 
would not make war upon them, but, on the contraiy, would 
protect and defend them as vassals of the king, his lord. 
The Moors replied that the inhabitants of the city were 
content to become vassals of the King of Portugal, and to 
pay him every year the dues — and they were many — which 
they had hitherto paid to the King of Ormuz ; and as to the 
demand of supplies for that occasion only they would give 
him all he needed. As Afonso Dalboquerque considered it 
below his dignity to haggle with them, he desired Antonio 
do Campo, Pero Vaz Dorta, and Jofto EstSo, scrivener to 
> A sort of heavy gun or cannon used in the sixteenth century. 



74 


COMMENTARIES OF 


the fleet, to speak with the Moors outside, and tell them 
that with the conditions mentioned he would receiye them 
into the friendship of the King of Portugal, but they must 
on their part give him abundance of supplies and fresh 
water, carried at their own cost to the city of Ormuz as 
long as he might remain there. After long discussion about 
these terms, the factor returned to Afonso Dalboquerqne, 
to tell him the Moors were unwilling to give more than they 
had at first agreed for. This reply annoyed him very 
much, and he ordered them before him, and asked them in 
a somewhat passionate voice how they dared deny to the 
officers of the king their lord those things that they de- 
manded, since they had but just then cast themselves at his 
feet, and told him they desired to be his vassals : let them 
go at once and tell the rulers of the city that next morning 
he would show them how Portuguese cavaliers chastised 
places which were unwilling to obey the King of Portugal 
and his chief captain. When the Moors perceived that 
Afonso Dalboquerque was angry, and cast them ofi* without 
any kind of agreement being concluded, they were in a 
great fright, and threw themselves at his feet, begging him 
to pardon them, and they would do whatever he desired. 
So he sent them to talk with Antonio do Gampo and with 
the factor. The Moors went out very dejectedly, and agreed 
to all that was asked ; and, the agreement being concluded, 
they went on shore again veiy gladly, and at once set about 
bringing the supplies as long as day lasted ; but when the 
morning came that Afonso Dalboquerque hoped would finish 
the work, they did not return, and no message came from 
land, but he was kept thus in suspense until midday, without 
being able to divine what change had taken place with 
affairs ; but in order to know better what course to take, 
he went into his skiff with D. Antonio de Noronha, his 
nephew, and D. Jeronimo and others, and went along the 
shore unconcernedly, in order to better understand the 



AFONSO DALBOQUERQUE. 


75 


matter^ and see tlie position of their stockades. At the 
time he arrived at the shore the boat of Afonso Lopez da 
Costa was on the beach taking in water^ and from the boat- 
swain who was in it he heard that all that night there had 
been great joy, excitement, and shouts in the city, and it 
was rumoured that a captain had arrived with ten thousand 
men from the interior, armed with lances and shields, whom 
the Benjabar sent to the aid of the city, and that the news 
was confirmed by the common sailors, who were at the 
watering places taking in water. Afonso Dalboquerque told 
the boatswain to get the sailors together without exciting 
suspicion, and if it proved difficult for him to collect the 
barrels, to leave them. So the sailors who were at the 
watering places, perceiving the excitement of the Moors, 
and fearing they would be murdered by them, left some of 
the barrels behind, and assembled at the boat in great haste, 
and related to Afonso ^.Dalboquerque the same news that 
the boatswain had g^ven him ; and he having seen every- 
thing very clearly, went to the Tafor^a, which was nearest 
to the shore, and despatched Dinis Fernandez in his skiff to 
land, bidding him summon one of those Moors who had 
consented to the agreement for peace. When the Moors, 
who were going up and down along the beach, saw the skiff, 
they gathered about, intending to take it ; but Dinis Fer- 
nandez, who .was well acquainted with their treacherous 
ways, seeing them in a state of excitement, did not touch 
land, but returned to the ships with some of his mariners 
wounded by the arrows shot at them. Afonso Dalbo- 
querque, seeing the shamelessness of the Moors, gave orders 
to Afonso Lopez da Costa, Antonio do Campo, and Manuel 
Teles^ to take their ships as close up to the shore as they 
could, and let down warps from the stem into the sea, 
that they might haul upon them whenever it might be 
necessary, and then to bombard the city to annoy the Moors, 
for he was determined to attack them in the morning. The 



76 


COMMENTARIES OF 


captains weighed anchor^ and took up positions according 
to the directions they had received^ and commenced firing 
with their artillery against the stockades^ but did very little 
damage^ as the wall was closely packed with earth. So, 
perceiving that from where they were they could do no 
good, they took up a new position opposite an entrench- 
ment made by the Moors outside the wall, and containing 
two mortars, which was rather exposed to our fire; and 
directly the firing began, the Moors deserted the mortars 
and fled away. When Afonso Lopez da Costa saw that the 
entrenchment was deserted by the Moors, he thought he 
could capture the guns ; so he went into his boat with his 
men, and went to attack the entrenchment and take them, 
and Antonio do Caropo followed behind to defend him, if 
there was any need for it ; but when they landed, the Moors, 
who came up to the rescue of the mortars, were so numerous, 
that if Afonso Dalboquerque had not happened to arrive in 
time to succour them, it would have gone ill with' them all, 
and as it was, when he arrived, Afonso Lopez da Costa was 
wounded, with five men in his boat, by the arrows ; so he 
caused them to be mustered, and after severely reprimanding 
them for having fought in that way, contrary to the orders 
he had given, he desired them not to cease firing against 
the stockades, for even if no injury were done, yet it dis- 
pirited the Moors who were therein. 


CHAPTER XXIII. 

How the great Afonso Dalboquerque, by advice of the captains, 
attacked the town of Mascate, and destroyed it, and what took 
place there. 

All this being over, the great Afonso Dalboquerque sum- 
moned all the captains from their ships, and told them they 
all knew the civilities which he had interchanged with the 



AFONSO DALBOQUERQUE. 


77 


rulers of that city of Mascate^ and he was truly concerned 
at their unwillingness to adhere to the agreement he had 
made with them ; and the principal reason that induced him 
to make this agreement was that the place was very well 
supplied with necessaries, and had a harbour excellently 
adapted to the protection of the ships passing that way on 
their voyage from India to Ormuz ; and in case any need 
arose while they were in Ormuz^ they could from this town 
obtain what supply was required ; and for all that the place 
appeared strong, as they all might see^ and populous^ yet he 
was determined to attack and destroy it^ for the rebellion 
they had made against him^ relying on the power of our 
Lord, who was greater than all, and he begged they would 
tell him tbeir opinion. The captains replied that in a matter 
so completely agreed upon and determined, there was 
nothing to advise about ; he might do as he Kked and they 
would follow him. Although Afonso Dalboquerque gathered 
from this reply that they did not think it advisable to attack 
the place, because its fortifications appeared very different 
to those of other towns which they had attacked, yet for all 
this he dissembled with them, and sent them back to their 
ships to prepare themselves, and ordered them to come on 
board his ship with all their men at the sound of his drum. 

On the next day, while yet the morning star was shining, 
he ordered the signal to be made, and the captains em- 
barked at once, and came on boai*d the flag-ship, and thence 
all set out straight to shore, and Jorge Barreto went in 
Afonso Dalboquerque^s boat with his men, and he himself 
alone in the skiff, settling with each one the part he was to 
perform. And because the place of entry differed from 
others, and there was much more danger in attacking it, 
and it Ibehoved them to use all possible diligence, in order 
to overcome the Moors with the least risk of their own 
safety, he ordered Francisco de Tavora and Afonso Lopez 
da Costa to unite their forces and attack the stockades on the 



78 


COMMBNTABIES OF 


right hand sidoj and when, these had gone in, to run along 
the wall and unite with himself who intended to force an 
entry on the left hand ; and having entered the stockades, 
they would then enter the town, being united in one body, 
for there were not enough men for two battalions. When 
he had told them this, all touched land, and attacked the 
stockade with the greatest fury ; and as at this time it was 
high tide, and our men had to land at the foot of the wall, 
the Moors commenced shooting arrows and throwing down 
stones from the top, so that our men had much difficulty in 
effecting a landing. But when they were on shore, Afonso 
Dalboquerque drew off the company he commanded, and 
proceeded to attack the stockades on the left, for there the 
greatest strength of the enemy lay ; and at the same time, 
Afonso Lopez da Costa and Francisco de Tavora attacked 
the same on the right hand side, as had been previously 
settled. The Moors who were inside, for a long time de- 
fended themselves bravely, but our men, albeit with difficulty, 
forced an entrance, and killed many of them. Francisco de 
Tavora and Afonso Lopez da Co.sta, having thus entered the 
stations, not bearing in mind the orders Afonso Dalbo- 
querque had given, with that vigour and impetus wherewith 
they had begun the fight, followed up the flying Moors until 
they drove them into a street in the town, where they put 
some to death ; but as many came up to the rescue, they 
ran a risk of being destroyed, so they turned back and 
went along the wall, seeking Afonso Dalboquerque, who 
severely censured them for disobeying his orders to come 
and unite with his company. 'Then all formed into one 
battalion, and marched to the attack ; but as the streets 
were veiy narrow, and the lances they carried very long, 
and as in their eagerness they strove to pass in front of 
each other, they beg^ to fall into confusion, so that the 
Moors in this fray wounded many with arrows. Yet, with 
all this trouble, our men fell upon the Moors so fiercely that 



AFONSO DALBOQUERQUE. 


79 


the captain^ who came from the interior with his men tc^ 
succour the town, when he saw himself assailed, turned 
and fled ; and Afonso Lopez da Costa and Francisco de 
Tavora, who were in the van, went after him, Afonso Dalbo- 
querque, with the rest of the men, being close behind, and 
they continued the pursuit a good stretch out of the city. 
Antonio do Campo, leaving Afonso Dalboquerque, in whose 
company he was, pursued a crowd of women who were re- 
treating to the hills, and killed many of them ; while JoSiO 
da Nova, because his own men were very much scattered, 
collected together a few and followed some Moors who were 
taking refuge in a valley below, and killed many, as well as 
women and children who were with them, without sparing 
any, so that one and all did great execution among them, 
and killed some of the principal Moors of th^ town, and 
among the number an eunuch, who governed under orders 
of the King of Ormuz. Finally, Afonso Dalboquerque came 
up to Francisco de Tavora and sent him into the country to 
collect all the men who were scattered abroad, while he 
waited ; and when all were assembled, he returned to the 
city, and put all the Moors, with their women and children, 
found in the houses, to the sword, without giving any quarter. 
Inasmuch as our men were much distressed with the heat 
and the hard fighting, and had eaten nothing all day, and 
there were no more Moors to fear, he ordered the captain 
to collect them and take them out of the town to rest at 
some waterpools, where the inhabitants used to get water, 
setting, nevertheless, sentries to watch the movements of 
the enemy, and prevent any sudden surprise ; and he sent 
thither some bags of dates, of which all partook and drank 
of the water, and remained there some time, until all had 
rested. Afterwards, he returned to the town, and ordered 
the captains to take stockades on the land side, and fortify 
themselves in them with barriers in the streets, and with 
mortars, that they might defend themselves from the Moors 



80 


COMMENTARIES OF 


in case they were attacked^ and to set fire to the neighbour- 
ing houses where the mariners were to take water for the 
ships^ lest any Moors should secrete themselves in them and 
cause trouble when they went for it. 

When everything had been thus set in order^ he gave per- 
mission to sack the town^ and told the captains that each one 
must take care to collect into his ship as large a quantity of 
provisions as possible^ for they were going to a land where 
there would be urgent need of them; and that they must keep 
good watch in the stockades, both by day and by night, for the 
Moors were on the mountains and saw all they did, and if they 
were to observe any remissness, there was very little doubt 
but that they would attack them by night, for they had no lack 
of soldiers, since they could get as many as they wanted from 
the interior. Our men began the sacking on the eighth day 
they had been there, and found nothing to lay their hands 
on ; but one day, as a soldier was entering a house, carrying 
a short heavy pike in his hands, he struck it by chance into 
the front wall of the house, and made a hole, whereby he 
entered in and found there much merchandise; for the 
Moors of the town, fearing lest the inhabitants of the in- 
terior should come and rob them, had each built a compart- 
ment inside his house, without door or windows, and filled it 
. . ^ 
with much merchandise. As soon as this came to the 

knowledge of our soldiers, there was not a house left 
standing which they did not break into, wherein they found 
things of great value, and the obtaining them made them 
forget their past troubles. And when every one had col- 
lected all the spoils he had found, and the ships had been 
provided with supplies, Afonso Dalboquerque ordered the 
captains to allot to each man a turn of duty, that water 
might be carried to the ships without those being endangered 
who carried it ; and seeing* that there was great lack of 
barrels for water in the ships, for all were cracked with the 
great heat of the sun, he ordered the captains to collect all 







AVONSO DALBOQUERQUB. 


81 


the wooden tauks which they found in the city (being used 
by the Moors in their ships for water), and those which 
were too large to pass through the hatches^ he ordered to 
be placed on deck, for they were going to a country where 
they would make great use of them, and so, if it had not 
been for these tanks, our people would have had great 
trouble in sustaining themselves in Ormuz after getting 
there. When all was collected, Afonso Didboquerque 
ordered them to fit out the ships with masts, yards, and 
shrouds, for there was great need of them. In this town 
there were taken many arms, bows, arrows, lances, and 
other weapons of iron of native workmanship, and much 
copper, thirty mortars, large and small, and much merchan- 
dise of every kind, which we burned, as we could not carry 
them away. 


CHAPTER XXIV. 

How the great Afonso Dalboquerque ordered the city of Mascate to be 
set on fire, and of the miracle which took place when the mosque 
was destroyed, -and how he returned to the ships, and sailed away. 

While the great Afonso Dalboquerque was ready on the 
bank with all his men to embark, a Moor descended from 
the mountains with a little white flag, and came up safely 
to him, and begged on the part of the rulers, since God had 
given him the city, and he had ^ined it like a brave cava« 
lier, that he would be content to have killed their wives and 
children, and not bum the houses or the ships. Afonso 
Dalboquerque replied that for his part he was very sorry to 
see so noble a city destroyed, but it was their own fault, for 
they had broken the agreement which' they had made with 
him, relying on the people who had come in from the in- 
terior, and, since this was so, they had no reason to demand 
anything of him ; but if they desired to ransom the place, 

G 



82 


COMMENTARIES OF 


ships^ and supplies yet remaining there, they might send 
him before noon next day ten thousand xernfins^ of gold, 
and if they did not send the money by that time, he 
promised them he would leaye nothing but dust and ashes, 
and that the people, whom they had on the mountains 
witliin. sight of the place, might bear them news of its 
destruction. When the appointed hour was passed, he 
ordered the city to be set on fire, wherein were burned 
many provisions, and thirty-four ships in all, large and 
small, many fishing barks, and an arsenal full of every re- 
quisite for shipbuilding ; and he ordered three gunners 
with axes to cut the supports of the mosque, which was a 
very large and beautiful edil .iie greater part of it 
being built of timber finely carved, and the upper part of 
stucco. When the supports had been cut through, and 
the gunners were about to go out, the building came down 
all at once upon them, so that Afonso Dalboquerque gave 
them up for dead; but, thanks to Our Lord, they came 
forth alive and sound, without a wound or a bruise, just 
as they stood when cutting the supports of the mosque. 
Our people were frightened, and when th^ saw them gave 
many thanks to Our Lord for that miracle which he had 
done for them, and set fire to the mosque, which was burned, 
BO that nothing remained of it. Now, as our people had many 
Moors, men and women, prisoners, whom they did not ex- 
pect to have any need of, and could not cany away, Afonso 
Dalboquerque gave orders that their ears and noses should 
be cut off, and that they should then be liberated. He then 
collected all his men, and went round the city to collect some 
soldiers who were wandering about at random for plunder, 
and came back to the beach to embark. As soon as the 
Moors, who were on the mountains, perceived that our people 
were about to gather themselves together, they began to 

^ Xxerafim was worth three toBtoea^ each valued at one hundred reis^ 
therefore 10,000 xerafina^ZfiOOfiOO 3,000 dollars « £625. 



AFONSO DALBOQUEBQUE. 


83 


descend^ and Afonso Dalboqnerqne, observing their descent, 
remained where he was on the beach, with his flag flying for 
a good while, to see what they were about to do. When 
the Moors saw that he remained quiet, they came on more 
slowly. And our people, thanking God for the victory ho 
had vouchsafed them, returned to the ships with great 
pleasure and contentment, firing frequently out of joy. 
And the Moors, noticing that our people were gone on 
board, descended the mountains in great haste, to see 
whether they could put out the fire which was raging in 
the city ; but its fierceness was such that they dared not go 
in to quench it, being caused by the quantity of oil and 
molasses in all the houses. 

Mascate is a large and very populous city, surrounded on 
the inner side with very large mountains, and on the sea- 
board it is close to the water's edge ; behind, towards the 
interior^ there is a plain as large as the square of Lisbon, all 
covered with salt pans, not that the tide reaches there, but 
the water which is produced therein is saltish, and converts 
itself into salt. Hard by there are many pools of fresh water, 
of which the inhabitants make use ; and there are orchards, 
gardens, and palm-groves, with pools for watering them by 
means of wooden engines. The harbour is small, shaped 
like a horse-shoe, and sheltered from every wind ; it is the 
principd entrepdt of the kingdom of Ormuz, into which all 
the ships that navigate these parts must of necessity enter, 
to avoid the opposite coast, which contains many shallows. 
It is of old a market for carriage of horses and dates ; is 
a very elegant town, with very fine houses, and supplied 
from the interior with much wheat, maize, barl^, and dates, 
for lading as many vessels as come for them. This city of 
Mascate is part of the kingdom of Ormuz, and the interior 
belongs to a king called the Betgabar, who had two brothers; 
between these [three] the land was divided, extending as far as 
Aden, and on the north reaching to the shore of the Persian 

G 2 



84 


COMMENTABIES OF 


sea, and from thence as far as the vicinity of Meca. The 
Moors call this interior the Island of Arabia, becanse the 
Persian Sea turns there opposite to the Bed Sea in such a 
manner that this round land is surrounded entirely by sea, 
that is by the Bed Sea and the Persian Sea. It is a veiy 
small land, and therefore the Moors call it the Island of 
Arabia. It bad been all governed by a king called the 
Benjahar, and this man had three sons, to whom at his death 
he left the land to be divided, the eldest always retaining 
the title of Benjahar, as the father had done, and the other 
two acknowledging him as their lord. This Befyabar has 
dominion over Fartaque, Dofar, Calayate, and Mascate, and 
his boundary reaches to the land of the Xeque of Aden : the 
other two are situated on the coast of the Persian Sea, and 
one of them had taken from the King of Ormuz the Island 
of Baharem, where there is a pearl fishery, about five days 
voyage from the Island of Ormuz, and had also taken from 
him Catife, an island held originally by the King of Ormuz 
on the Arabian coast. In this land, which these lords hold, 
there are many horses, which the farmers breed for sale ; 
there is also great abundance of wheat, maize, and barley, 
and g^eat fiocks and herds, and there are many who hunt 
with falcons about the size of our goshawks, and take by 
their aid certain creatures {alimarias), smaller than gazelles, 
training very swift hounds to assist the falcons in catching 
the prey. 


CHAPTEB XXV. 

Of what took place between the great Afonso Dalboqnerqoe and Jo8o 
da Nova, and how he set ont from Mascate to the town of Soar,^ 
and what passed with the governors of the land. 

When the great Afonso Dalboquerqne had returned to 
the ships with all the men, because he had been informed 

* See the plan and description of the fortress of Soar, in BesendeVi 
work, ff. 133-136. 



AFONSO BALBOQUEBQUE. 


85 


that Jofto da Nova was determined to start off to India 
without permission^ he ordered him to be summoned to his 
ship^ and before all the captains who were present^ told him 
that he had been informed that he was desirous of going off 
to India without leave« and deserting him in this war^ when 
there was need of many more ships and men than were then 
available, and the more so^ as his ship Fhr de la Mar was 
so powerful that it alone was able to destroy all that coasts 
whereas he himself for his part was determined to set his 
face in the city of Ormuz, leaving first of all behind him all 
its towns destroyed^ that no enemies might remain behind 
them. And although Afonso Dalboquerque had understood 
that the captains were in the league with JoSLo da Novaks 
intentions^ as they were all getting so wearied with the 
war, yet he desired them to give him their advice on this 
matter. The captains told him that since he was deter- 
mined to go to Ormuz and destroy every place that was 
unwilling to put itself under the King of Portugal, he ought 
to take with him not only the Flor de la Mar, but twenty ships 
if he had them there ; and they said this because, if they 
had said the contrary, it would have been evident that they 
had counselled JoSU> da Nova to go. And with this advice of 
the captains, Afonso Dalboquerque received profession of 
obedience from JoSo da Nova, and ordered him, under 
grave penalty, not to go away, but to continue to follow 
him; and he put up with everything without replying a 
word, for he was not innocent of the charge, and Jo9o Estfto 
was instructed to draw up a notice of this, and lay it before 
the master and pilot. He then ordered the captains to 
return to their ships and weigh anchors, and sail along the 
coast, according to their usual custom. And as they sailed 
along, they passed by six desert islands, one in front of the 
other; and Afonso Dalboquerque, in order to make sure, 
ordered the pilots to keep to seaward of them, as it was 
night, and on the following morning they stood in closer to 



86 


COMMENTABIlflS OF 


shore, not to pass by Soar^ and the Moorish pilots said that 
Soar was further on. While they were in that latitude, a 
head wind struck them, and obliged them to make for land, 
and they anchored two leagues from it, and remained there 
all the night, and when it was morning they beheld a large 
and very beautiful town. Afonso Dalboquerque inquired of 
the Moorish pilots what the name of the place was, and 
they said that it was the fortress of Soar, and they dared 
not carry him to it, as it was very strong, and contained 
many men, both horse and foot, and if ho was to be over- 
come there he would lay it upon them. But Afonso Dalbo- 
querque replied that even although Soar were very strong, 
yet he would do to it as he had done to other places, and 
they themselves had better be careful, for in the chart which 
the pilot Omar had made, he had notice of all the places 
along the coast, and if henceforth they omitted any, he would 
order them all to be cast into the sea with cannon shot round 
their necks. He then ordered his anchor,, to be weighed, 
and stood as closely in to shore as ho couldX^itli all the fleet, 
but as it was a rocky bottom, they anchored half a league 
from the place. When all the fleet had anchored, a Moor 
came at once from the place, and brought a message for 
Afonso Dalboquerque from the Alcaide of the fortress, and 
told him that the fortress before him belonged to the King 
of Ormuz, therefore ho had better not make any intention 
of landing, nor think that he would do therein as he had 
done in other places by which he had passed, for they were 
in a position to defend themselves very differently. And 
as the Moor uttered this grand speech, those on shore 
began to parade the horse and foot soldiers, blowing 
trumpets and without ceasing. Afonso Dalbo- 

> A sorfc of (straight) Moorish trumpet.— ; Furyra. 

Gdos Anafijs ns Mouros respondi§k>”. 

Lusiada, ii, 106. 

«« Com toucaa na cabe^ e navegando, 

Auafis sonorosos tSo tocando." — i, 47. 



AFONSO DALBOQUERQUE. 


87 


qaerque’s reply was that the Moor might inform the 
Alcaide to beware what he was doing, for if he refused to 
put himself under the obedience of the King of Portugal, 
his lord, he might be certain that on the following morning 
he would be with him on shore, and take his fortress from 
him, and put him in chains. The Moor went away not 
very well pleased with this reply, nor were our party quite 
satisfied when they beheld so largo a place, with a veiy 
strong fortress and so many people in it ; but considering 
what had taken place in other parts, they relied on God 
Our Lord to help them. As soon as the Moor had gone off 
with the reply, Afonso Dalboquerque sent notices to the 
captains of what had passed with the Moor, and bade them 
make ready, eeoh one bringing his ladder to scale the wall. 
He orflered also two guns to be prepared, and many axes 
and mattocks, and alferces^ and all the apparatusr necessary 
for making a strong stockade, from which he could assail 
the fortress ; so that in case they could not obtain imme- 
diate possession of it, they might yet be in such a position 
that they could assemble in the boats without endangering 
themselves, and this was so hastened on, that on the fol- 
lowing day at noon all was ready and put into the boats. 
When on the point of setting out for the shore, three of the 
principal Moors of the place arrived with a message from 
the Alcaide and rulers of the land to Afonso Dalboquerque, 
telling him that they had of their own accord parted with 
two thousand horsemen and five thousand foot soldiers, 
whom the Beryabar had dispatched to assist them in de- 
fending his domain, for as they were not trustworthy, they 
were unwilling to admit them into their fortress, and since 
the King of Ormuz had not sent them the aid which they 
had requested of him, they had made up their minds to 
become vassals of the King of Portugal, and the Alcaide 

^ A provincial word, implying a sort of toothed or forked implement^ 
; BbUeau. 



88 


COMMENTARIES OF 


was prepared to deliver up the fortress to him. Afonso 
Dalboquerque’s reply was that they should say to the 
Alcaide and rulers of the city that he would accept the 
town and fortress in the name of the King of Portugal his 
lord; and that he was very glad to see that they had 
thought better of the message they had sent him^ because 
of the grief it caused him to be obliged to destroy such a 
noble place as that was ; but the accepting must be on 
condition of their paying reasonable tribute. The Moors 
were so dejected at seeing the apparatus which was ready 
in the boats to be taken to the attack of the place^ that they 
no longer wished to protract the business^ and told him that 
it was not necessary for them to return to land^ as he could 
make whatever agreement he wished with them^ since they 
brought a plenary commission from the rulers and Alcaide 
of the fortress. 


CHAPTER XXVI. 

Ilow the great AfoDao Dalboquerque sent a flag to the rulers of Soar, 
to be set up on a tower of the fortress as a signal of peace ; and 
of the manner of its reception, and what further passed. 

Inasmuch as the great Afonso Dalboquerque desired that 
there should be no delay in this affair^ he determined forth- 
with to come to a final arrangement with the Moors, saying 
to them that as they were minded to become vassals of the 
King of Portugal, and put themselves under his orders, he 
was about to send them a flag of his royal arms, to be set 
up on the highest tower as a sign that they were his vassals ; 
so it was necessary for them to go on shore, and tell the 
Alcaide and rulers of the place to come to the beach, with 
all the population, to receive it, and he would cause it to 
be taken thither. The Moors went away with this message, 
and Afonso Dalboquerque ordered Francisco de Tavora 



AFONSO DALBOQUEBQUE. 


89 


and Afonso Lopez da Costa to make ready their boats with 
gay flags flying, and their men equipped in the best armour 
they had, to escort the flag which was to go in his ship^s 
boat ; and he told D. Antonio do Noronha, his nephew, to 
prepare himself to accompany the flag to shore, and Jorge 
Barreto de Crasto, and Aires de Sousa Ghichorro, and Duarte 
de Sousa de.Portalegre, to bear it, with five men well ap- 
pointed accompanying them, and JoSlo EstSLo, scrivener to 
the fleet, to make a note of everything that was done : and 
he instructed the captains that the persons who were to 
bear the flag were not to go on shore until certain Moors 
had been received into the boats as hostages, and that 
nobody was to enter the fortress except those whom ho had 
ordered to take possession of it. When all this was arranged, 
the captains took their leave, and on reaching the land, they 
asked for six Moors to be detained in the boats, who were 
immediately delivered up; then Jorge Barreto, with the 
others of his company, disembarked, and the Alcaide and 
rulers, who were waiting on the beach with all the populace, 
received the flag with great delight, and began to march, 
the Alcaide of the fortress going in front, in very rich apparel, 
with a Turkish sword in his belt and a staff in his hand, 
clearing the way and striking the people, who were in 
crowds, on this side and that. When they arrived at the 
castle gate, Duarte de Sousa and the rest above-mentioned 
entered with the flag, and went and set it up on the highest 
tower, and when it was seen by the men on board the ships, 
they saluted it with all their artillery. And JoSLo Est9.o took 
possession of the castle for the King of Portugal, and closed 
the gates, without leaving any one in it, and a notarial 
account of all the proceedings was drawn up. This finished, 
all embarked again and released the Moors detained as 
hostages. 

On the following morning the Alcaide of the fortress sent 
to Afonso Dalboquerqne, desiring permission to enter therein. 



90 


COMMENTARIES OF 


promising to obey the King of Portugal, and perform what- 
ever he might command him. So Afonso Dalboquerque sum- 
moned the captains and some Fidalgos and noblemen of 
the fleet, and recounted this message to them^ which the 
Alcaide had sent, asking them to give their advice as to 
what he had best do in the case. The greater portion con- 
sidered that he ought to retain the fortress ; for if he had a 
captain and some men in it, he would have, as it were, his 
foot upon the neck of all the coast. Afonso Dalboquerque 
replied, that when he found the fortress was so strong, he 
had determined to retain it ; but, as he was resolved to go 
to Ormuz, and had neither ships nor men to detach for 
separate service, he had changed his mind, resolving to 
leave it in the hands of the Alcaide, and go away until he 
saw how affairs at Ormuz would turn out. And because 
this opinion of Afonso Dalboquerque was well received by 
all, he sent word to the Alcaide, that on condition of his 
continuing obedieAt to the King of Portugal, and becoming 
his vassal, he would give him the fortress. The Alcaide, 
anxious to come to the end of the matter, and regain his 
position as lord of the fortress, sent one of his servants 
forthwith with a message for Afonso Dalboquerque, telling 
him that he accepted the favour offered him ; and, as the 
fortress now belonged to the King of Portugal, and he had 
revolted from the allegiance of the King ofOrmuz, he hoped 
Afonso would make some provision respecting the pay of 
the men who were keeping guard there ; for if they were 
not paid they would all desert. The representation made by 
the Alcaide seemed to Afonso Dalboquerque very reasonable, 
and he could in no way omit paying the men who were re- 
quired there, as he had elected not to garrison the fortress 
with his own men ; so he summoned the rulers of the place, 
and informed them that the yearly tribute duo for the future 
from them was to go towards the payment and sustenance 
of the men whom the Alcaide required to keep guard over 



AFONSO DALBOQUERQUE. 


91 


the fortress, just as they had hitherto paid to the King of 
Ormuz; and they must cause to be prepared a paper written 
in Arabic upon the agreement^ signed by them, and by the 
Alcaide; while he, on his part, would execute a counterpart 
for them in the name of the King of Portugal, sealed with 
the royal seal of arms, and under these conditions he would 
receive them into the allegiance of the King of Portugal. 
The rulers hereupon went on shore, and summoned a meet- 
ing of all the people of .the city and territory, and laid be- 
fore them the demand made by Afonso Dalboquerque, and 
it was universally resolved to acquiesce in what was required 
of them. On the following day, therefore, in the morning, 
the paper was forwarded to him signed by all, together 
with a present of cows, sheep, and fowls, and he sent them 
a counterpart sealed with the seal of the King of Portugal, 
and to the Alcaide and to the two principal Moors of the 
place, some articles from Portugal. He ordered also Gaspar 
Kodrigues, the interpreter, to pay a visit to a captain of the 
Benjabar, who had remained there with thirty horsemen, 
when the others who had come to succour the fortress had 
been dismissed, in order to see our ships and the Portu- 
guese, and he sent him a silver washing basin and a golden 
chain. When this had been done, leave was taken of the 
Alcaide, and the captains received orders to make all ready 
for departing on the following day. 

The population of Soar is very large, the town being 
very beautiful and containing very good houses. There 
is a fortress of square shape, with six towers round it, 
having also over the gate two very large towers. The 
ii^all is of good height, and proportionately broad, placed 
close upon the coast in a large bay, which the coast there 
makes. The harbour has a very rocky bottom. Our ships 
were anchored in six fathoms, and from them to the shore 
it was over half a league. The fortress is so large that it 
requires more than a thousand men for its defence. They 



92 


COMMENTABIES OF 


say they can isolate it with fresh water; for they have some 
close by. The situation of the fortress is very favourable^ 
and when the tide is high the sea rises almost up to the 
wall. Within the fortress there were only the houses re- 
quired for those who guard it. The houses of the Alcaide 
were very beautiful^ he being a principal man from Ormuz^ 
whom the late king ruined^ and cast out of the city by 
reason of quarrels he had with one of his servants ; yet for 
all that^ he was a man well esteemed among the Moors 
as a cavalier. There would be about six thousand and 
upwards of inhabitants in the place^ and five hundred 
cavaliers^ the greater part of these armed with steel armour, 
covered with plates of iron, arranged after the manner of a 
roof tiled with slates, and they are strong enough to resist 
a shot from a cross-bow. The fore-quarters of the horses 
are similarly defended ; their saddles are of Turkish style, 
rather high in the pommel; the stirrups also resemble those 
of the Turks; their spurs are pricks of iron or copper set in 
a plate fixed to the heel of the boot, and always so worn. 

This place Soar contains more nobles than any other place 
along the coast. The land is more open from mountains 
towards the interior than the other places ; its territoiy is 
very extensive, and all cultivated with wheats maize, and 
barley^ and as the country is thickly wooded, many cattle 
and horses are bred. The interior parts here are of the 
dominion of the Benjabar, and at peace with the King of 
Ormuz ; and whenever any differences arise between them^ 
and the people of the Benjabar attack them, they take 
refuge immediately in the fortress. The people of the in- 
terior are called the Badons^ and the greater portion of the 
horsemen are archers, but some carry lances and Turkish 
maces, while all the footmen go naked from the waist up ; 
they wear hooded caps of felt, lances, and bucklers. The 

' Badens, Bedaween^ or Bedouins, a term applied generally to 
the nomadic tribes of Arabia. 



AFONSO DALBOQUEKQUE. 


93 


horses are Moorish^ of a largo kind, well shaped^ and fleet. 
Great quantities of dates and maize are exported hence. 


CHAPTER XXVII. 

How the great Afonso Dalboqucrqnc set sail from Soar, and went along 
the coast direct to Orfa^So, and how he took it. 

Haying taken his leave of the Alcaide and rulers of Soar, 
on the following morning the great Afonso Dalboquerquo 
set sail, and proceeded direct to OrfaqSLo/ and that night 
kept well out to sea to avoid a large bay which the land 
makes there. On the next day, sailing thus along the coast, 
they sighted a small zambuco, which put off from one of the 
country houses lying along the beach ; when he perceived 
it, Afonso Dalboquerque sent the boats after it *to take it, 
but the zambiico sailed so fast that they could not come 
up with it and speedily lost sight of it. It was after- 
wards discovered that it went and informed OrfagSLo of 
the approach of our fleet, and thereupon proceeded on 
its way to Ormuz direct. As they sailed then along the 
coast, they perceived a very large place, and the Moorish 
pilots from Melinde were not quite certain regarding the 
knowledge of the country ; but a pilot whom Afonso Dal- 
boquerque had taken on board at Qocotor& told him that 
the town in sight was OrfagdiO, and in Omar's book it was 
so called. As soon as our fleet had arrived opposite the 
place, the small ships anchored close in to shore, but the 
large ones a little further out ; and each one of them laid 
out two anchors, as the anchorage was not good. As they 
entered the harbour, the inhabitants made a great show 
with many men on foot and horse, and many camels, and 

> Probably identical with the fortress, twelve leagues distant from 
Soar, called Corf acam by Pedro l^uretto de Resende, who gives a plan 
and description of it, if. 136-138. 




91 


COMMENTABIES OF 


there was a great excitement among them. Afonso Dal- 
boquerqae ordered the captains to make everything ready 
by night; for he was determined^ in case the inhabitants 
did not come to put themselves in his hands^ and make 
themselves tributary to the King of Portugal, to attack 
them on the following morning. All this time the people 
of the country^ both on horse and foot^ continued moving up 
and down the beach, with a great parade, skirmishing with 
one another, beating kettledrums (atahaquesj , and giving 
their usual shouts, at one time making as if they would 
launch an almadia into the sea, at another drawing it 
back to shore, while the camels did nothing but go out of 
the town gate laden with stuffs towards the interior ; and 
so the whole day passed until nightfall, without anyone 
coming from the shore to the ships. 

As soon as night fell, Afonso Dalboquerque sent word to 
the captains that when they heard his drum beating, they 
should make all ready and prepare their boats. Two hours 
after midnight, to awaken them, he ordered the signal to be 
gpven, and the captains, being all prepared, came imme- 
diately on board the flagship, and as they approached it the 
morning broke, and all started in well-appointed order, 
straight for the place, wherein were many people : some on 
the wall towards the interior ; many others on a hill over- 
looking the town; while some on horse and on foot con- 
tinued to march up and down the beach. When our men 
arrived, they began at once to fire the mortars they had in 
the boats ; and the Moors, fearful of our shooting, deserted 
the beach and gathered together into the town. As soon 
as^e beach was clear, our men landed, and formed in two 
companies; in the vanguard went Francisco de Tavora, 
Afonso Lopez da Costa, and JoSLo da Nova, with some 
Fidalgos and Cavaliers of the fleet; in the rear, Afonso 
Dalboquerque with the other captains and the rest of the 
men. On coming up to the town, they attacked it in two 



AFONSO DALBOQUSBQUE. 


95 


plabes; and in front of Dalboqnerqne’s company was Antonio 
de Noronha^ his nephew, who followed up the Moors until 
he drove them through a gate ; and when they got in^ they 
left the small door open^ and came to a hand to hand fight 
with lances. While this was going on, Afonso Dalboquer- 
que came up ; and, seeing D. Antonio de Noronha at the 
gate, cried out : ''Ah I nephew, what a shame is this. Are 
you here too 7^' And, with these words, he covered himself 
with his buckler, and went in by the small gate, fighting 
the Moors with his^sword ; and he set himself with his back 
against the gate, and defended it until our men entered in 
a body, and there put many to death. By this time, Fran- 
cisco de Tavora, with the other captains, had forced an entiy 
at another part of the place, where they had killed many 
Moors. And when the survivors perceived that they were 
cut off on one side, and already worsted on the other, they 
took to fiight, and our men pursued close upon their heels. 
And Afonso Lopez da Costa with his men in the front, 
and Antonio do Campo behind him, followed the Moors far 
up into a mountain, wherein they trusted to be in safety, by 
availing themselves of the stones as missiles ; but the cap- 
tains followed so closely upon them, that the Moors, not to 
injure their own men, left off hurling at ours. And because 
our men were enticed by the Moors to follow them, Afonso 
Dalboquerque hurried up with the men in his company, and 
collected them together, and returned with the united force 
again into the town, which was already deserted; and as he 
came near, he saw a band of Moors going out of the gate of 
the town wall, and he ordered Francisco de Tavora to inter- 
cept them, while he himself, with the other captains and 
men, followed him. So passing a palmgrove, which is 
situated just as one goes out of the place, Francisco de 
Tavora came up with some of the people who were fleeing, 
and spared no lives, and then returned to the position held 
by Afonso Dalboquerque, according to the orders he had 
received. 



96 


COMMENTARIES OF 


As soon as Francisco de Tavora was returned^ Afdnso 
Dalboquerque^ perceiving that nevertheless the Moors made 
slow retreat^ and were like tired people^ unable to walk, 
dispatched Don Antonio de Noronha with eighty men, part 
carrying cross-bows and matchlocks, to pursue them and 
fall upon them fiercely, thinking to become thus possessed 
of all the spoils they carried, while he kept in sight, that he 
might render any assistance that might be required. As 
the Moors were now at some distance, D. Antonio followed 
after them at a brisk rate, and soon came up with those on 
foot, .while those on horses, seeing the conflict between us 
and their comrades on foot, turned back to defend them, 
and wounded some of our men with arrows, among whom 
was Antonio Yogado, servant of the Constable, who was 
struck with an arrow in the face. But when the Moors on 
horseback perceived themselves evilly treated by our cross- 
bowmen and fusileers, they deserted their comrades and 
took to flight, and dared not come near us again. While, 
however, our men were thus engaged in fighting the Moorish 
horsemen with lances, those on foot had time to get a good 
distance away; so Don Antonio returned to the pursuit 
after them, and, when he came up with them, attacked them 
with lances, and put many to death, capturing women and 
children, and taking from them the spoils they were carry- 
ing. Afonso Dalboquerquei, seeing that Don Antonio was 
proceeding in disorder, and that there was no more time for 
going forward, in consequence of the weariness of our men, 
sent word to him to hold back and return to where he was 
himself. And in Don Antonio^s company were Jofto Estfto, 
Antonio de S&, Pedralvares, Nuno Yaz de Gastelobranco, 
Antonio Fragoso, Aires de Sousa Ghichorro, Femfto Soarez, 
Lizuarte de Freitas, Antonio de Lis, Jofto Teixeira, Antonio 
da Costa, Joane Mendez, and Jofto Goelho, all honourable 
cavaliers, who at that time were not living with the king, 
but preferring rather to merit that honour by their own 



AFONSO DALBOQUERQUE. 


97 


good service than for their fathers* or grandfathers* sakes, 
besides many others who fought right valiantly that day. 

When all were united together^ Afonso Dalboquerque 
ordered all the cattle to be collected which were wandering 
about in the plains^ and the captains to take their stations 
on the wall to guard the place until he could collect the 
supplies that were so much needed. And while they were 
thus at their stations^ many Moors came along the ridge of 
the mountain which leads over the wall^ where Antonio do 
Campo had his station^ slinging stones^ and shooting many 
arrows ; and as it was a place that our men could not well 
approach^ being a veiy steep rock^ Afonso Dalboquerque 
gave orders that five 8hip*8 cannons should be brought up 
and trained from the tower, which was close to the station 
held by D. Antonio do Campo, and with thesQ they began 
to fire upon the Moors, who were scattered in front, and 
killed four or five, when the others, who saw that the artil- 
lery was too much for them, and that they had no protection 
on the mountain from the shot, assembled together with 
many others from the opposite side of the hill, and proceeded 
towards the pools just outside the town, and loosed some 
large stones down upon our people, who were just then 
getting water. The cross-bowmen and fusileers, who .were 
stationed at the town gate to protect those who were 
engaged in supplying the ships with water, began to fii*e 
upon them,, and knocked three or four of them down ; so 
the- Moors, seeing that they were hard pressed, retired that 
day and never came again. But on the following day, in the 
morning, there came three Moors, riding on horses and 
bearing a white flag, close to the "place, demanding a safe 
conduct for themselves, under pretence of parleying with 
the captain of the fleet, but it seems that they did not want 
anything, for they never came again after the free pass had 
been accorded to them. 

As soon as Afonso Dalboquerque got free from these 



98 


COMMENTARIES OF 


distarbances, and saw that the Moors were gone off together, 
he gave orders that the young men who had been captured 
there should be divided among the ships to work, and with 
them the captains began to collect what supplies were to be 
obtained, and these were very few. As for the old Moors 
who were of no use for work, he had their noses and ears 
cut off, and then let them go, so that all who had their lives 
spared were marked in this manner.^ Among the Moors 
who had beeA captured here, Nuno Yaz de Castelo-branco 
took one, found in a house, who by reason of his extreme 
old age was unable to flee, and as he showed by his costume 
that he was an honourable man, Nuno desired to save him, 
and carried him before Afonso Dalboquerque, before whose 
feet he cast himself. Afonso ordered him to rise, asking 
him whom he was. The Moor replied that he was one of 
the three governors of the place, and being very old and 
unable to walk, his sons, to save their own lives, had left 
him in the open conntiy and gone away, while he, to avoid 
the fuiy of the soldiers, had not ventured to wait where he 
was, but returned to the house wherein the cavalier had 
discovered him. Afonso Dalboquerque inquired of him 
respecting affairs at Ormuz, and he gave ample information 
about it, and related much of the past histoiy of the 
kingdom, for he was vexy old and veiy well informed, 
praising the spirit of the Portuguese, and saying that he 
could not with truth deny that they were able to conquer 
the whole world, for having read the life of Alexander, who 
had conquered that conntiy, he had not found that this 

^ For a native soooiint of these bmtalities, alleged to have been eon- 
stsatly prsctiBed by EuropeanB on the Malabar coast, the reader will do 
wdl to consult a work entitled **Tohfat-ul-Mujahideen”, an historical 
work in the Arabic language ; tnnslated into English by Ueutenant 
M. J. Rowlandson, London, 1833. 8vo. At p. 103 is a section ‘*Be- 
connting some of the wicked acts of whidi the Franks were guilty**. A 
copy of the Arabic text is in the British Museum (Additional MS., 
22375). 



AFONSO DALBOQUEBQUE. 


^ 99 


hero*8 army had any superiority over that of the Portuguese. 
Afonso Dalboquerque was astonished when the Moor spoke 
of having read the life of Alexander, and asked him where 
he had read it, for he himself was well read, and well in- 
clined to imitate his actions. The Moor then drew from 
his pocket a book^ written in Persian, bound in crimson 
velvet, according to their fashion, and gave it to Afonso 
Dalboquerque, who indeed prized it more than anything 
else he could have given him, and accepted it, as it were, 
as a good omen respecting the determination he had formed 
of conquering Ormuz. He then gave orders that the^oor 
should be presented with a scarlet robe and some other 
Portuguese things, whereat he was greatly rejoiced; but 
much more so to find himself free, with his ears and nose 
entire. In this port they found no native or foreign ships, 
for all had fied as soon as news of our fleet* reached them, 
and the merchants of Guzarat^ had also gone inwards 
through the Persian straits, with their households and 
merchandise. And all the nights that our people spent in 
the place the Moors gave them so many alarms that they 
were tired to death, yet for all that they kept such a strict 
watch that the enemy could not have forced an entry, even 
if they had numbered ten thousand. 

The captains having now laid in an ample supply of fresh 
water, not knowing how long it might be before they could 
get any more, as there was great scarcity of it at Ormuz, 
Alfonso Dsdboquerque gave orders that they should collect 
their crews, and each one for himself set fire to the place, 
and when the fire began to seize upon the place, there was 
not a house nor a building left which would not fall to the 
ground. Thereupon they assembled on the beach and 

> This was, without doubt, a copy of the well-known heroic poem by 
Nizami, entitled ‘^Iskandar Nftmah’*, or the Uiatory of Alexander the 
Great. The author died about a.h. 607, or a.d. 1210. 

* Gujarat (?). 

H 2 



100 


COMMfiNTABlES OF 


embarked, giving many thanks to our Lord for the favour 
he had shown towards them. 

Orfa9£Lo is a large tqwn of the kingdom of Ormuz^ and 
contains veiy good houses ; it is veiy strong on the land 
side, and the reason of it is this, that it was more fearful 
of being attacked by land than by sea. Many worthy 
merchants of Guzarat lived there. The town lies at the 
foot of a very high mountain, and on the land side it has 
a veiy strong wall, which is carried along to the sea ; there 
are two islands within the harbour which improve it very 
much. In the interior arc many estates with good houses, 
many orange trees, lemon trees, zamboa^ trees, fig trees, 
palms, and all sorts of vegetables, and many water pools, 
which they use for irrigation ; in the fields is much straw 
stubble, as in Portugal, and there are many maize fields. 
There were also many fishing barks, and many nets, all 
which were burnt ; in the town there were also. Urge stables 
for horses, and many straw lofts for their straw, for this 
port exports many horses to India. The countiy has a 
temperate climate and fine air. After passing this moun- 
tain, which overlooks the place, all the interior country is 
composed of large fields under cultivation and farms, and 
all this interior is under the dominion of the Bevyahar, as 
the other parts are. 

1 Bluteau saya of the Zamboa : It is a kind of lime or citron tree, 
which yields a fruit of the shape of an orange, but much larger, and of 
a more deeply yellow colour. The taste of it resembles that of the 
orange, but insipid. It is called Ptmum Adami, because it has on its 
rind the appearance of two bites, which the simplicity of the ancients 
imagined to be the vestiges of the impression which our forefather 
made upon the forbidden fruit, as though it had been reproduced upon 
this fruit for the remembraime of our disobedience. Others call it 
Pomum Auyrium^ for they say that the first stock came from Assyria.” 
The tree is probably one of the varieties of the OUrtu Mediea of Ian- 
nssus, with a pronounced warty base to the fruit. Yieyra calls tlm 
Zatndoa a sort of pome citron, of a deep yellow colour. In Arabic the 
word is written ZdnMa or Zdmhda^ according to Dosy^.Olosaaire dea 
mots EspagnoU tt Portugais^ p. 863. 



AFONSO DALBOQUEBQUE. 


101 


CHAPTER XXVIII. 

How the great Afonso Dalboqueiqne set out from Orfa^So to Ormuz, 
and what passed with the captains when the city came in sight. 

The great Afonso Dalboqnerque, having gone on board 
his ship, gave orders on the following morning to signal 
to the captains that they should weigh anchor and set sail ; 
and while all were going on in this manner with a land 
breeze, a thunderstorm from the land struck them, and the 
wind dropped. So, because there was a violent current 
towards a bay which the land makes there, all the fleet 
re-anchored. And with this storm so much rain fell for 
the space of two hours that the water got in between the 
planks of the deck, which had opened by reason of the 
heat, and spoiled some provisions. They TOmained there 
all that night, and on the following morning the wind 
veered round to land, ahd they sailed along the shore as 
before. After two days they reached Cape Macinde,^ and 
having doubled it in one day, by the afternoon they sighted 
two small islands, not inhabited, lying on the route to 
Ormuz ; so when they were just opposite to them, a Moorish 
pilot (who had been taken on board at OrfaQflo to be carried 
to Ormuz) advised Afonso Dalboquerque to order the sails 
to be furled, and all to remain with their foresails at most, 
for that night they would be off the island of Ormuz.^ This 

^ Bas MusBendom, or Musandim. In Banretto’s plan ^^Cabo de 

MmiaaniiRm 

t Ormuz, or Hormuz Idand, 27 deg. 8 min. H., 66 d^g. 26 min. £. 
See the plan and description in Pedro Barretto de Beaende’a MS., f. 
155. A very intereating account of the doings of Afonao Dalboquerque 
at Ormuz may be gathered from Brih Mua. Add. MS. 20901, *which is a 
sixteenth century Portuguese MS., from the collection of Lord Stuart 
de Bothesay. The following account from the fly-leaf of this MS. will 
best show its importance 

** £ste Liyro [me deu Manuel de Carvalho de Ataide no anno de 
1714, o qnal era ... . (erasures) • . . • , ejse oonservava sem pergaminho 



102 


COMMBNTABIES OF 


same Moor related to Afonso Dalboquerque^ when he found 
himself carried away to seaj that it was but ten days since 
he had come from OrmuZj and that the king was already 
aware of his approach^ and had a large fleet to flght with 
him^ and in the city many soldiers and many munitions of 
war. Afonso Dalboquerque was not pleased at this news^ 
and commanded the Moor not to mention to any one what 
he had told him. The other Moorish pilots, whom Afonso 
Dalboquerque had brought from Melinde^ advised him to 
go as before^ and not shorten saib for if he did he would 
not come in sight of Ormuz until next day. 

The advice of these men was approved of by Afonso 
DalboquerquOj and he gave orders that the fleet should sail 
on as before^ with all sails set, until midnight, when he 
ordered a gun to be fired four times, as a signal for striking 
sail, and all took in their mainsails and mizentopsails,^ and 
as the sea was smooth, and the wind fair, they proceeded 
along with their foresails until the morning watch, when he 

6 com folhas menos no prindpio como esti. He hna Historia do desco- 
brimento e primeiras conquiatas da India eacrita na Lingua que naquelle 
tempo ae falava, e com a m& ortographia que oa Fortuguezea aeguiam. 
Fdtamlhe os primeiroa quatro capituloa e o nome de aeu autor ; maa a 
marra^m, aindaqne aimplea e de eatilo antigo, parece sincera e he muito 
mas antiga que Jeam, de Barroe e Damiao de Ooee e chQga ao ate quando 
Affonao de Albuquerque conquiatou Goa que foy no anno de 1510 e 
faleceu em Dezembro de 1515.** Signed Freire**. 

Aa 1 intend, on some future occasion, to publish this manuscript, or 
a tranaUtion of it, I merely in this place draw the attention of the 
reader to the arguments of two chapters, which deal with the present 
position of Afonso Dalboquerque and Portuguese affaiis in Arabia : — 
Gapitulo 77 (folio 1665). Como os nosos chegaram a villa de OrfacS 
e como os mouroa a despuseram e se forft o6 suas Riquezaa.’* 

Cap. 78 (fo. 1675). Como cheguaram hh cidade de Ormuz e dos 
Recados 4’ l^uue amtre ElKey e o CapitSo moor e da batalha q* 
houuezam e como os Imiguos foram vemcidos e morttos muytos delles.** 

* A Jal (Glouaire Ifautique, Paris, 4to, 1848, p. Ill) trandates 
this passage thus : — Quatre feuz, qui 4taient le signal pour amener 
les voilea^ et tous se mirent alors sous une voilure nouvelle, compoa^e 
de la grande voile et du contre-artimon.** 



AFONSO DALBOQUERQUE. 


103 


oi*dered a sounding to be taken^ and found himself in 
twenty-five fathoms, and hereupon he signalled to the 
other ships, to know in what depth they were, and all 
ordered soundings to be taken, and found the same depth, 
and thus they went along until two hours before morning, 
when they felt the land breeze, and in a short time the 
morning began to break, and they saw land clearly. 
Afonso Dalboquerque inquired of the pilots if the land he 
saw in front of him was the Island of Ormuz ; but as it was 
yet dusk, they did not feel quite sure whether it was the 
Island of Ormuz, or of Lara, or of Queixome,^ for all these 
three lie in a triangle. When, however, the morning was 
now cleared up, they recognised it as the Island of Ormuz, 
and the other two were in sight. Now, as the bottom was 
getting more shallow every moment, Afonso Dalboquerque 
became angry with the pilots, but they assured him that 
he had no cause for being alarmed at the lessening of the 
depth, for it was a shelving rock, and he would be able to 
anchor in the harbour in five fathoms. And as, when the 
sun rose, they were close upon the island, Afonso Dalbo- 
querque conversed with the captains, and ordered them to 
go along the coast, and fly all their flags, and make ready 
all their artillery, and many weapons, and make all the men 
arm themselves, in order that, if anything should happen 
when they doubled the point, whence all the city could be 
seen, they might not be taken by surprise ; and all made 
haste to be in readiness, and all the ships, one after the 
other, in order, doubled the point of the island. 

Having doubled the point, when the captains beheld the 
greatness of the city, and the number of mounted men who 
were assembled on the beach, and many ships in the harbour 
well manned and armed, they became dismayed, and in that 
state of mind came alongside of Afonso Dalboquerque^s 

■ These are called Lareqwi and Quewome on the Flan in Barretto de 
Resende’s MS., f. 155. The Arabic names are JLdrek and Kiahm. 



104 


COMMENTABIBB OF 


shipj and desired him to be cantioas what he was going to 
meddle with^ for that city was not like those others which 
he had destroyed^ as many soldiers could be noticed on 
shore^ and there were many ships^ and these well armed, 
and in their opinion there might even be more than they 
yet saw, for many days had elapsed since news of his coming 
had reached Ormuz. He ought, therefore, they said, to 
take good advice in this business, and not come to any con- 
clusion by himself alone, without taking the opinion of all 
of them. As Afonso Dalboquerque had been many days 
wearied by their importunities, he replied that he confessed 
it was a very serious undertaking, and one which required 
great caution; but as they were now got into the place, they 
wanted rather a good determined spirit than good advice. 
So he refused to hold any more conversation with them upon 
the subject, but he ordered Manuel Telez and Afonso Lopez 
da Costa to set their larger sails, and keep on sounding the 
depth. And if they found that the bottom did not become 
less than five fathoms, as the pilots had assured him, they 
were to anchor dose to the Moorish ships, while he and the 
other captains would follow close upon them. Thus they 
all went and anchored close up to the Moorish ships, the 
small ships on the side of the land, and the greeA ships on 
the sea board. And as Antonio do Campo’s ship was small, 
he ordered it to cast anchor dose to his own ship, heading 
towards his ship ; and told his master to cast an anchor and 
buoy it, so as to reach to a ship close to his own, which was 
the largest there was in the fieet. And when all the fleet 
had anchored, he ordered that a salute should be made to 
the dty with all the artillery ; and as it was now sundown, 
there was no more time for anything that day, except to 
make all taut, and all that night they kept a good look out. 
The shouting of the Moors, and the sounding of kettledrums 
and trumpets {atabaquea e anafis) was so great that there 
was not a man who could hear what any other said to him. 



AFONSO DALBOQUBKQUE. 


105 


CHAPTER XXIX. 

Of the fleet which the King of Ormuz had in the harbour, and how it 
was arranged, and of the messages which passed between him and 
the great Afonso Dalboquerque. 

As some days had elapsed since the king had received 
certain information of our fleets and the destrnction which 
the great Afonso Dalboqnerqne had wrought in all the places 
along the coasts he began to prepare himself to fight with 
him. For this end he gave orders to detain all the ships 
that came into the port of Ormuz^ and added a force of sixty 
great vessels^ into which he draughted off many soldiers and 
much artillery^ with everything that was required for the 
undertaking. And among these great vessels there was 
one belonging to the Eang of Gambaya, called the Meri, of 
about one thousand tons burden, with many men and guns^ 
and well equipped for its own defence; and another of the 
Prince of Cambaya^ of six hundred tons^ so well appointed 
that it required nothing from the king’s magazine. And 
besides these ships there were in the harbour about two 
hundred galleonSj which are long ships with many oars^ but 
not very large, and they are armed with two large mortars 
in the prow, and packed with cotton bales, so high that 
the rowers are hidden from sight. There were also many 
terradas^ (like the barques of Alcouchete) full of small guns 
and men wearing sword-proof dresses^and armed from head 
to foot, most of them being archers. All this fleet was 
rigged out with flags and standards, and coloured ensigns, 
and made a very beautiful appearance. The large ships were 

> Terradas^ or dtore-bostB. Bszros (ii, 27, 4 ; 80, 1} uses the word to 
signify light rowing-boats employed in carrying supplies to Ormuz from 
the main land. The term isal8o_applied tosmall boats for service in war. 

* Laudeii. Bluteau quotes ** hum laudel de laminas** Barros^ ii dec., 
fol. 10, col. 3; and " laudete de a^^odSo,** id. iii, 95, 2. 



106 


COMMENTARIES OF 


on ihe outside^ and the galleons and terradas on the land 
side of the city^ alternately arranged^ the stem of one to the 
stem of the other; and in this order they had encompassed all 
our fleet. On shore, too^ there were to all appearance along 
the beach fifteen or twenty thousand men, very brilliant 
with their arms, many of them on horses, and blowing their 
trumpets and and the shouting on land and on the 
ships was so great that one would think the world had come 
to an end. 

As soon as Afonso Dalboqnerque perceived the order in 
which the Moors had arranged their fleet, and that this time 
they meant fighting, he summoned his captains and inquired 
of them what he should do, and whereabouts he should com- 
mence, for his determination was, with the help of Our Lord, 
to fight the fleet, however great it might be, and risk his 
life and everything else for the honour and credit of the 
Eang of Portugal his Lord; and, therefore, he did not ask 
if he should do it, but how he should do it. And although 
there were many different opinions among the captains and 
the others, when they beheld themselves with a small fleet 
encompassed by so many ships, and were alarmed also at 
the great size of the city, and the numbers of soldiers it 
contained, so that they could no longer form any good coun- 
sel as to what they should do ; nevertheless they agreed to 
fight, but first of all to communicate with the king to know 
his intentions. 

Upon hearing this opinion expressed by. the captains, 
Afonso Dalboqnerque sent Gaspar Rodrigues, the interpreter, 
in the skiff to desire the captain of the ship Meri, which lay 
nearest to him, to give him a messenger by whom he could 
forward a message to the king; and the captain sent two, 
and made an offer of whatever else of which there was need. 
And by them Afonso Dalboqnerque sent word to the kiog 
that he had come thither with the King of Portugal's fleet 
with the desire of serving him ; and by reason of the tumult 



AFONSO DALBOQUBBQUE. 


107 


he observed among the men on board the ships, he desired 
to know whether there was to bo peace or war between 
them. When the king had received this message, he forth- 
with forwarded the answer by an Armenian Moor, named 
Cogebeirame, who, upon entering the ship, found Afonso 
Dalboquerque and all the captains and nobles, armed, sitting 
on the quarter deck on benches covered with carpets, and 
all the rest of the fleet’s company armed ; and having made 
his obeisance (slightly disquieted) he said to Dalboquerque, 
Sir Captain, the King of Ormuz hath heard thy message, 
and desireth to know of thee what thou wishest, and what 
thou comest to seek in this his port?” Afonso Dalboquerque 
answered him : '^Say to the King of Ormuz, Chat the king 
D. Manuel, King of Portugal, and Lord of the Indies, de- 
siring greatly his friendship, hath sent me to this his port to 
serve him with his fleet, and if the king be willing to be- 
come his vassal and pay him tribute, I will make peace with 
him and serve him in evexything he shall command me 
against his enemies ; but if he be unwilling, let him know 
that I will surely destroy all this fleet wherein he placeth his 
trust, and take his city by foroe of arms'^ 

Cogebeirame took his leave with this reply, which was 
much reprehended by the captains, who* said many things 
to their chiei^ as though they would chide him for replying 
so harshly to the king at a time when there was need of 
passing many compliments between them. But Afonso 
Dalboquerque, with his accustomed invincible spirit,^ said 
to them, ''Gentlemen, I am not the man to adiieve so im- 

^ AfwMo DaUbo^uierqiu^ com mgmd emfsa tntMMM fm Hnhm^ etc. 
GamOes, in aevend passages, alludes to the indomitable nature of Afonso 
Dalboquerqne, as, for example : — 

Albuquerque tenibil, Castro forte, 

£ outroa, em quern poder nlo tere a morte.*’ 

Zunodcc, i, 14. 

««Mais estan^ caniara esta l^rena 
Em lonvor do illustrisaimo Albuquerque, 



1D8 


COHMSNTABIES OF 


portant an affair as this is with dissemblings and sentimentSj 
but as a cavalier and great captain I will perform the daties 
entailed npon me by the orders I have received from the 
king our lord^ and therefore fortune may incline whichever 
way she pleasethj but I trust in the Passion of Jesus Christ 
in whom I place all my confidence^ to break the spirit of 
these Moors and render their king tributary to the king, 
our lordj or they must take my head in their hands ; and 
this is the beat and soundest advice that in such a state and 
season as this we can take^ for we are so placed that we can 
do nothing else ; therefore let every one go to his ship and 
prepare himself^ and when he hears one gun fired^ let him 
up and do as he shall see me do/* So Gogebeirame reached 
landj and recounted to the king all that had passed with 
Afonso Dalboquerque and how he had found him. And the 
king sent him immediately for Cogeatar and all the govern- 
ors of the city, and related to them the reply brought by 
Gogebeirame, and the rest he had acquainted him of. Go- 
geatar, as he was the principal in the government, and the 
man upon whom all was dependent, said that the advice 
that the king ought to take in the business was to protract 
the aflhir as much as he could until the arrival of the fleet 
and soldiers sent for from the mainland, which could not 
possibly be later than the next day, as he already had in- 
formation that they were on the other side ; and they ought 
not, he said, to be frightened at the proud reply which the 
chief captain of that fleet had made to Gogebeirame, for it 
was to hide their fear by bn^^ng, and he himself hoped to 

Mas alembrou-lhe hums iia, quo o oondena, 

Postoque a fama sna o mimdo cerque. 

Se o peito, ou do cioeo, on de modesto, 

Ou de uaado a crueza fera e dura, 

Co'os seoa huma ira insana dSo refrea, 

Pde na fama alva noda negra e lea.’* 

X, 45, 47. 



AFONSO DALBOQUERQUE. 


109 

take alive all the Portaguese who were there, and make use 
of them in the war with the neighbouring people. This 
advice of Cogeatar was well received by all the governors ; 
for by reason of the number of ships and men they had, 
they thought it would be great folly for our men to desire 
to fight with them. 

So the king again sent Cogebeirame to Afonso Dalbo* 
querque to say that he was highly delighted at his coming, 
because he wished to make a friendly treaty with the King 
of Portugal ; but he desired to know, since he had deter- 
mined to come to the port and make an arrangement 
for peace and friendship with him, wherefore he had de- 
stroyed his places that he had all along that coast, killing 
all the people that he found therein ; for if he had received 
any insult from the rulers of these places, it was from him 
that he ought to have sorught redress, instead* of destroying 
them ; and as for the tribute he had sent to demand, he 
would commune with his governors and officers of his 
revenues, and remit him the reply that they might agree 
upon. When Cogebeirame arrived with this reply, Afonso 
Dalboquerque sent forthwith a summons for the captains, 
and told them that they had many times complained of him 
behind his back that he did not give them any account of 
what he did, but now was an opportunity for them to 
advise him and reprehend him ; for the reply sent to him 
by the king rather appeared to be dissembling than an 
agreement to give what was demanded, since he had made 
mention of the evil which his places had received at their 
hands. The captains replied that they had much reason to 
complain of him, for his coming to Ormuz had not been 
by their advice nor of their own will ; but as they were now 
there, they would have to make some kind of convention 
with the king, because, by reason of the quantity of soldiers 
and ships which were in the port, they did not doubt but 
that they were very likely to be all undone, and since the 



110 


COMMENTARIES OP 


agreement could be brought about without any trouble, they 
desired him as a great favour that he would use his best 
endeavours to arrange the affair peaceably. 

Afonso Dalboquerque hereupon told them that he had 
not come thither to beg of the King of Ormuz, but to 
make war upon him if he were unwilling to become sub- 
servient to the King of Portugal, and that they had been 
there already three days, and all the rest of the time they 
might spend there without coming to any determination 
would be clearly a proof of their weakness. When this 
conversation with the captains was over, he told Gogebei- 
rame to report to the king that he was very glad at the 
desire he had evinced for having peace with the King of 
Portugal his lord, for it would be better for him to do so ; 
but this must be finally concluded without more words, and 
that as for his complaint that he had acted unreasonably in 
burning and destroying his places, the fault lay with his 
captains, who had endeavoured to deceive him, seeing that 
before he had made war upon them he had laboured hard 
for peace, and the proof of this was that he had not de- 
stroyed Soar and Galayate because those in command there 
chose peace. Gogebeirame returned with this reply, and as 
it was the policy of Gogeatar to protract this matter, he 
immediately sent Gogebeirame back again, begging Afonso 
Dalboquerque not to be annoyed at any delay there might 
be, for the king could not pay tribute without the advice 
and assent of all the lords of his kingdom, that there might 
not hereafter arise doubts about the payment ; but that his 
men might come on shore safely and take fresh provisions 
and whatever else they required. This he did to gain some 
idea of the number of Portuguese in the fleet, for he was 
astonished at what Gogebeirame had reported as having 
witnessed in Afonso Dalboquerque's ship. As Dalbo- 
querque, however, became more and more acquainted with 
the stratagems of Gogeatar, he told Gogebeirame to inform 



AFONSO DALBOQUKRQUE. Ill 

him that he had been there waiting for the king’s ultimate 
reply three days, and desired him graciously to take good 
advice, and on the following day in the morning he would 
send him word of his future intentions ; for unless an 
answer reached him, he assured him he would destroy his 
fleet, and afterwards capture the city by force of arms. 
And he dispatched the captains to their ships to make 
ready, and when they heard a gun shot, do as they saw 
him do. 


CHAPTER XXX. 

How the great Afonao Dalboqueique, seeing that the reply was put off, 
proceeded to attack the fleet which lay in the port of Ormuz, and 
defeated it. 

Although the captains were not very well* pleased at the 
reply sent by Afonso Dalboquerque to the king, yet having 
returned to their ships, they made ready their artillery and 
apparatus for assault, waiting for the signal which he had 
appointed. At the same time, the Moors, being alarmed 
at the consultations held in our ships, kept on hauling 
their cables, which were laid out in the direction of the 
city, to get further off from us. .But. as Afonso Dalbo- 
querque perceived all that they did, he at once sent a mes- 
sage to the captains to go into their boats with armed men 
and splice their cables together, and lay them out with 
buoys close along the Moorish ships which were crowding 
away. The captains, though they were dismayed at the 
peril in which they found themselves, like brave and spirited 
cavaliers, set to work, and the master of the flag-ship, with 
flffcy armed men, proceeded to place a grapnel upon the 
cutwater of the ship Meri} The ship’s captain, well aware of 

V ** Et le maltre de la nef capitune, avee 50 hommea arm^s, alia fixer 
un gnppin dana la gmgkre de la nef Jfm.” A. Jal, Qlou, Naut,^ 
p. 792. 



112 


COMMENTARIES OF 


the reason for the king's delaj^ perceived the changed po- 
sition of our ships^ and called out from the quarterdeck to 
Afonso Dalboquerque not to be angered, for the reply 
would be sent very soon. And no less praise is due to the 
masters, pilots, and seamen, for, though fighting was not 
their profession, yet, being armed at all points, with great 
spirit and assiduity they carried out all the instructions 
given by the captains. 

When Afonso Dalboquerque perceived the gleaming of 
the swords and waving of the bucklers, and other doings 
of the Moors on shore, who acted like people who cared 
nought for him, he understood by these signs that Coge- 
atar was determined to give him battle, and that there 
was no more time now for dissimulation, as they were now 
gotten into the place, but he would have to find some 
remedy for himself. He, therefore, made up his mind to 
attack the enemy before they received any of the expected 
succour, and put himself in order to make an assault on the 
fleet on the following day, .;qnless a reply arrived, appointing 
the different commands of his *ship{ to D. Antonio, his 
nephew, and Jorge Barreto de Crasto, D: Jeronymo de 
Lima and D. Jofto de Lima, and all the remaining Fidalgos 
and king’s officers in his ship. He ordered Nuno Yaz de 
Castelo-branco to take charge of the artillery and gun- 
powder, and advised the captains of the other ships to 
make similar arrangements, and remain in readiness and do 
whatever they saw him do. When morning brok^ and 
Afonso Dalboquerque plainly saw that no message fi:t>m the 
king was forthcoming, and that this 'delay meant war and 
not peace, he ordered a broadside to be fired. The bom- 
bardiers took aim so that with the first two shots they 
fired they sent two large ships which were in front of 
them, with all their men, to the bottom — one being the 
Prince of Gambaya's, the other that of Meliquiaz of Din. 
Afonso Lopez da Costa, who was stationed on the land side. 



fmAme socikhe 




‘AFONSO DALBOQUKKQUF. 


113 


vanquished and sent to the bottom some portion of the gal- 
leons and atalaias^ which his artillery could reach. Manuel 
Telez, after having caused great slaughter upon some 
vessels^ gave orders to let go a cable^ which was laid out 
to the sea, and ran into a large vessel which lay close to 
him, and killed a part of the men in it, while the rest threw 
themselves into the sea, and those who were heavy-armed 
went down at once. JoSLo da Nova, too, with his artillery 
did great execution among the ships which lay along the 
piles; as did also Antonio do Campo and Francisco de 
Tavora among the galleons which had surrounded them^ and 
all night long they kept on hooking their anchors together 
in order to catch the galleons in the middle of them.. And 
although the Moors endeavoured to avenge themselves with 
their artillery, our men were so well fortified with their 
defences, that they did them no harm, except on the upper 
deck, and with their arrows they wounded some people. 

The fight was so confused on this side and on that, both 
with artillery and arrows, that it lasted some time without 
either party seeing each other by reason of the smoke. As 
soon as this cleared off, Afonso Dalboqnen^ue ordered in 
great haste to let go a cable which he had lying out sea- 
ward, and ran into the ship Jifert, and killed many, of its 
men with matchlocks and crossbows, and among them the 
captain (who was a principal man of Gambaya) ; and when 
Afonso saw the discomfiture of the king’s fieet, and the 
unexpected victory which . Our Lord had sent him, and the 
Moors throwing themselves into the sea from fear of our 
artillery, thinking, forsooth, that they could escape in that 
way by swimming, in order to repress them he left 
his ship and took D. Antonio with him in his skiff, 

' Atalauu. Swift rowing boats used to accompany large vessdfi^ and 
keep up their communications with the shore or the fleet. The Arabic 
signifies a sentinel, a watch-tower”. In this passage the word means 
giiard-boaU". See Dozy, Olouairt^ 209, 210. 

I 



114 


COMMENTARIES OF 


and called out to the captoins to take to their boats 
and follow up the victory. And the first captain who 
came np to him was Manuel Telez, and as his boat was 
the lighter for rowings he got into it with his royal 
flag (which is now in the church of Our Lady of Grace), 
and proceeded, in sight of all our .men, to set himself in 
the middle of the Moorish fleet, so as to be wherever he 
was required, and give orders to the captains respecting 
their proceedings, and there he remained without yielding, 
though well plied with arrows and gunshot. And he com- 
manded Jorge Barreto de Crasto to get into his boat with 
Jorge da Silveira, Aires de Sousa Chichorro, Duarte de 
Sousa, Nicolao de Andrade, Nuno Yaz de Castelo-branco, 
and many other Fidalgoa and king’s officers with him, and 
go and attack the ship Meri, and if there were any men 
left in her, to put them all to the sword without sparing the 
life of any one. 

So Jorge Barreto proceeded to attack the ship, and the 
first who entered was Gaspar Diaz de Alcacere do Sal, and 
as he boarded her they cut off his right hand, which imme 
diately fell down there with the sword in its grasp, and 
Afonso Dalboquerqne gave him of his possessions for life 
ten thousand reals pension. After him entered Jofto Estfto, 
scrivener to the fleet, who defended him from being killed, 
and Fero Gonqalvez, pilot, who received two such severe 
wounds that he had like to have died, and Nuno Yaz de 
Castelo-branco, who with his cross-bow wonnded and killed 
many Moors, as long as his supply of arrows lasted. And 
after these all the others entered who came with Jorge 
Barreto, and three mariners from the flagship, and all united 
together fought with such spirit, that of sixty Moors who 
were left in the ship, unwilling to trust themselves to the 
sea, all lay dead stretched along the deck; and so the 
ship remained with the men whom Jorge Barreto left in it 
to guard it. 



AFONSO DALBOQUSBQUE. 


115 


CHAPTER XXXI. 

How the captaini^ after the taking of the ship Meri^ followed up their 
victory, and of the havoc they made in the fleet, and how the great 
Afonao Dalboquerque proceeded to attack the jetty,^ where he was 
wounded. 

When Jor^e Barreto had taken possession of the ship 
Merif onr men who were left in her began to use her artil- 
lery against the people of the city^ who promenaded upon 
the beach, and did them much damage, while Jorge Barreto 
went to join D. Antonio, who was proceeding in the skiff 
of the flag-ship, and Francisco de Tavora, in his own boat, 
and all pursued some galleons, which were flying for safety to 
the island of Queixome ; and with the artillery they had at 
hand, as well as with their matchlocks, they killed an in- 
numerable multitude of Moors. In company with D. 
Antonio there were Francisco de Melo, Pero Gomez, Bui 
Diaz (sons of gentlemen of Alenquer), and Simon, eldest son 
of the Commendador of Almourol, James Teixeira, Duarte 
de Melo, Pedralvres Froes, and Antonio Yogado. These 
captains, after haying routed the galleons and sent many of 
them to the bottom, went on towards the place where Afonso 
Dalboquerque was stationed, and he forthwith dispatched 
Antonio do Campo to go and take possession of a ship 
which was on the point of yielding; and with him went 
Nicolao Juzarte, his nephew, and Antonio Dabreu, and 
xhany others ; and they fought with it a long time without 
being able to board it, for the Moors of the ship were 
Fartaquins, and made a stout defence. 

> Cerame^ a Malabar word for a kind of watch-tower made by erect- 
ing a flooring upon the standing trunks of four trees arranged in a 
square, over which is placed a roof of palm-leaves. Gf. “£1-Rey de 
Calecut em seu Cerame.**— Sarrcs, i, 203, 2. In this chapter the word 
appears to be used for a kind of pier erected upon piles, and forming a 
kind of jetty, which latter word I have adopted in the translation of 
this chapter. 

i2 



116 


COMMENTARIES OF 


When Afonso Dalboquerque perceived them in this 
strait^ he sent Afonso Lopez da Costa to their assistance^ 
and he was accompanied by Antonio de Lis^ son of Alvaro 
Gil de Lis, of Setnval^ and Antonio de Azevedo, and Bras 
da Silva, his brother, and Alvaro Fernandes, page of the 
chapel to the king, and other gentlemen, who fought so 
well that they forced an entiy into the ship, and killed a 
great number of the people in it, while some who could not 
stand against the fury of the attack cast themselves into 
the sea. JoSo da Nova, who was close by them, seeing them 
in the sea, took to his boat with Fem&o Soares, Jofto Luis, 
servant to the king D. Manoel, and Antonianes, master of 
his ship, and all began to slaughter the Moors who were swim- 
ming, and killed many of them, while others were drowned ; 
and thereupon he went to grapple with a large ship, wherein 
were many Moors who had not yet been exposed to our 
fire ; and as he began to attack them, Francisco de Tavora 
arrived in his boat, and with him Manoel de Lacerda, 
D. Jofto de Lima, BastiSo de Miranda, Pero DalpOe, Martin 
Yaz, Lopo Alvres, servant of the Constable, and Diogo 
Neto, and many men-at-arms. And so arriving along- 
side the ship, he on the one side and Jo&o da Nova on 
the other, they boarded her, and killed as many as they 
found in her, without sparing any lives. Afonso Dalbo- 
querque, who was keeping a look-out over what was being 
done, perceived that some managed to escape by swimming, 
and ordered the captains to intercept them on the land 
side, and put all to the sword ; and they did so, and gave 
life to none. So numerous in the sea were the Moors, who 
cast themselves out of the ships which the captains boarded, 
or belonged to the ships which our artillery had sunk, that 
as they could not find room to get off in the limited 
number of boats, and our soldiers were now fatigued with 
the carnage, they got away in large numbers by swim- 
ming. 



AFONSO DALBOQUEBQUE. 


117 


At this period Cog^atar was advancing in a parao, well 
equipped^ with its bulwarks covered with red cloths^ and a 
half-round top on the masthead^ inspired with the greatest 
fury of battle^ encouraging his men to fighl^ and he carried 
with him many Turkish braves^ their arms inlaid with silver 
and gold^ and many archers^ unknown to us until the last 
moment^ when a Moor announced it to Afonso Dalbo- 
querque^ just as Cogeatar was already making for land 
after the defeat of his fleet. Thereupon he ordered 
the captains in their boats, and Jorge Barreto de Castro 
to follow him to land^ and attack the pwrao wherein he 
was. And when they came up with them, the Moors 
were so close to the houses that they cast themselves 
into the sea, and Cogeatar likewise with them, leaving 
behind in the parcLO many swords adorned with gold and 
silver, and agomiaa^ and brocaded vestmeflts, and silk, all 
the spoil of the nobles, which our people took from him, 
and with it they returned to the place where Afonso Dalbo- 
querque was. And when all were reunited, they returned 
again to the battle on the sea with the Moors who were 
swimming, and with lance thrusts and cuts they killed 
so many of them that, although, as they were tired of 
slaughter and unable to accomplish their whole puipose, 
some managed to escape, yet the sea was so tinged with 
blood that it was a fearful thing to look at. 

The cabin boys and ships' servants, also, on their part, did 
nothing but thrust the bodies under water with grappling- 
hooks, and tear out their bowels, in such a manner that the 
slaughter was great among them ; and there was one cabin 
boy who alone put to death eighty Moors. And inasmuch 
as all this took place along the water's edge, our people suf- 
fered much loss by reason of a jetty, which the king had 
made of wood, placed in the sea in front of the gates of 
the castle, with the artillexy contained in it and with arrows. 

^ Agimia^ a kiod of pordard, like a scythe, used by the Moofa^F. 



118 


COMMENTARIES OF 


As soon as Afonso Dalboqnerque observed that we were 
exposed to the artillery^ he ordered his boat to be driven 
fiercely upon the jetty^ determinings as soon as all the cap- 
tains had assembleds to attack the castle ; and there was 
not much doubt but that he would have entered it if all 
uniteds for the Moors were so full of fear at the rout they 
sustaineds that there was but little to do to effect an en- 
trance. But the captains had not been aware of his inten- 
tionSs neither did Afonso Dalboqnerque think it possible ; 
but the victory and the rout of the enemy showed him what 
he could have done if all had arrived in time; yet with 
him none was found except Antonio do CampOs and both 
fought fiercely with the Moora who were placed upon the 
jetty; and with the g^s that they carried in the boats 
they killed some of them at the castle gateSs and these they 
saw dragged off at once into the fortress. The rowers in 
the boat wherein Afonso Dalboqnerque was^ on the return 
from the fight^ launched it in such a manner that they 
drove the boat under the jetty, and there Afonso Dalbo- 
querque was wounded, as were also Manoel Telez with an 
arrow-shot in the face, and Pero Yaz Dorta, and Jorge da 
Silveira and two bombardiers, and three or four more men ; 
and in the boat of Antonio do Campo there were wounded 
himself and Antonio Dabren and five mariners. And for all 
that these were then wounded, they fought so fiercely with 
the Moors that they drove them right through the castle 
gate, and in this all the captains assisted in their boats, and 
united together and disembarked, and inarched along the 
city firing into all Che houses. This battle, which our men 
had with the Moors on the sea, lasted from seven o’clock in 
the morning until three in the affcemoon, and in it there 
perished an infinite number of Moors, and the gunners so 
managed that day (for Our Lord was thus pleased to help 
them) that there was not a single shot fired that did not 
send a ship to the bottom and put many men to death. 



AlfONBO DALBOQUSBQUE. 


119 


CHAPTER XXXII. 

How the great Afonso Dalboqueique routed the fleet, and traversed the 
city, burning and destroying all the suburbs ; and how the king 
sent two Moors in a ferry-boat to sue for peace. 

Afonso Dalboquerque, not content with having . routed 
and destroyed all the king's fleet, in order that nothing 
might remain undone, gave instructions to Afonso Lopez da 
Costa, Antonio do Campo, and D. Antonio de Noronha, to 
go in their boats and give chase to some guard-boats that 
were making off towards the mainland. And as they went 
favoured with the victory which Our Lord had given them, 
they pursued them, and sent all that they overtook to the 
bottom, and put to death all the people that were in them, 
and to others they set fire, and these went on *burning over 
the sea, wherever the wind drove them, and it was a great 
sight to behold. And Afonso Dalboquerque, with the other 
captains, went along the beach, bombarding the suburbs, 
burning all the ships that were moored to the shore ; and 
they approached so close that from the windows and terraces 
the enemy wounded some of the men with arrows and stones; 
and all the ships he met with in the sea, as they were col- 
lecting together to moor themselves to the land, he took and 
set on fire, putting all the people to death. 

And as at this time there were some captains going about 
in disorder in their boats after this kind of fishing, he gave 
orders that a signal should be made for them to return to 
the place where he was, and all retum4^ at once and came 
to land half a league from the city. As soon as Afonso 
Dalboquerque arrived he found Fraincisco de Tavora and 
Joflo da Nova there, like persons of little prudence, with their 
men on land; and when he came up with them he told them 
that, as men to whom it was difficult and almost impossible 
to fight in that fiBuahion they ought not to remain so care- 



120 


COMHSNTABIEB OF 


lessly on their enemy^s land, without his permission, and com- 
manded them tp return at once to the boats, and ordered 
Afonso Lopez da Oosta to disembark with his people, and 
go and take a hill whereon were large buildings and sepul- 
chres of noble Moors, and to reconnoitre from thence idl the 
country, and see what was going on there ; and with him he 
sent certain gunners and other people to set fire to any ships 
they might meet with, and the houses in the vicinity. When 
Afonso Lopez da Costa had reconnoitred the country and 
saw that it was in a 'safe state, he set out from the hill along 
the side of the suburb with his people in sight of onr boats, 
burning and destroying all he found ; and Afonso Dalbo- 
querque followed supporting him on the sea side along the 
shore, with all the captains, and from that point up to the 
city not a thing remained in the suburbs that was not 
burned, without any one offering resistance. And some 
Moors, who were minded to fortify themselves in some 
houses and defend them, died there, all being burned, while 
all the ground along was covered with people fiying from 
the city to the mountains. 

Cogeatar, finding all the fleet of the King of Ormuz routed, 
and his own bravado repressed, and fearing lest Afonso Dal- 
boquerque should attack the city, now ordered a white flag 
to be raised upon the highest tower of the castle, in sign of 
peace. Afonso Dalboquerque, as he was going along the 
houses, perceived the flag, and rested on his oars at once 
and remained stationary, sending Afonso Lppez da Costa 
who was coming along the land, to collect his men ; and as 
he was thus engaged, there arrived a ferry-boat with two 
Moors and a white flag, seeking peace ; these Moors were 
natives of Ourfto,^ and had bnt a few days before arrived at 
Ormuz and brought news of the fleet which the king D. 
Manuel had sent to Turkey, wherein was the Count Prior as 
Captain-General, and by means of them the king of Ormuz 
sent word to Afonso Dalboquerque, that he put himself into 
■ ? Oran, the Arabic form is Wahran. 



AFONSO DALBOQUIBQUE. 121 

his hands, and would deliver up the city to him, since he 
had taken possession of all the rest of his kingdom. 

And as the sun was now gone down and the men had 
eaten nothing all the day long, Afonso Dalboquerque retired 
to his ships, and sent one of the Moors in the almadia to 
land with a message to the king, that before ever he would 
enter upon any business that the Moors had broached, he 
must send him ten principal Moors of the city as hostages, 
who without any more delay, on the following day at dawn, 
must come on board his ship, and he must know for a cer- 
tainty that at the least attempt at deception he would order 
them to be cut in pieces and cast on shore. As soon as one 
of the Moors had set out with this message, Afonso Dalbo- 
querque retired to his ships with all his men to rest after 
the labours of that day, and took with him the other Moor 
who was called Abedali.^ And when it was morning he 
sent word to the captains to come in their boats on board 
his ship, and they made their way to all the Moorieh ships, 
which were at anchor without crews, and ordered them to 
be cut adrift, and to be set on fire. As the land breeze was 
blowing they drifted over the sea burning, so that it waa a 
fearful thing to see it. 

And as there were some ships which were among our 
fleet, and it was dangerous to set them on fire, Afonso Dal- 
boquerque ordered them to be scuttled, and they sank to 
the bottom, after they had first taken out of them some 
of their contents for the use of the fleet. When this had 
been done he returned and they reassembled, aiad he told 
the captains that they must get ready, for if no reply 
from the king arrived before ten o'clock he was determined 
to attack the fortress and enter it by force of arms and take 
the king prisoner with all his governors. The captains re- 
tired to their ships, ill pleased with this determination of 
Afonso Dalboquerque ; but they dared not to speak of it 
to him, and he went to his ship and sent for Abedald and 
■ Abedala, — Obaidallah, diminutive of Abdallah. 



122 


COHMSNTABIBS OF 


acquainted himself through him of the state in which the 
City of Ormuz lay, and asked him. what was the reason that 
the king was unwilling to make peace and friendship with 
him. Abedali told him that the king was a young man^ 
and it was not his fault, but that Cogeatarj who was governor 
of the kingdom, had worked upon the king not to make 
any agreement with him^ as he was quite certain of the vic- 
toiy when he saw the smallness of their fleet and fewness of 
the men; and that he had caused proclamation to be made 
throughout the city, that every Moor who killed a Portu- 
guese should die for it, but they were to take them all alive^ 
that he might by their means make war upon the Benjahar ; 
and Cogeatar had summoned them on the day the fleet 
arrived^ and inquired of them what manner of men the 
Portuguese were, and whether they were warlike, and what 
men they might bring in their fleet ; and they told him that 
the Portuguese were reputed cavaliers beyond all the Chris- 
tian and Moorish kings of those parts, and it was because 
they were so that the King of Portugal had gained posses- 
sion of many places in the kingdom of Fez from the Moors; 
and upon hearing what they told him, Cogeatar began to 
threaten them greatly, but they answered him : Sir, do 
not deceive thyself but believe me, if there is no sword 
there will not be any law of Mahomet.’^ 

And on the morning of the following day, the Moor who 
had accompanied Abedald returned, and brought four prin- 
cipal Moors as hostages. Afonso Dalboquerque began to 
grow angry, and asked him why the king had not sent the 
ten Moors whom he had sent to demand. The Moor 
answered him that all the people of the city had fled or 
were dead, and, therefore, he had only sent four who were 
the chiefs of the land ; and the king had said that if he 
were not content with this, he would come himself and 
deliver himself and all his household into his hands. Afonso 
Dalboquerque dissembled with him, and made no reply 



AFONSO DALBOQUSBQUE. 


123 


until he saw how the matter would turn out; but ordered all 
the captains^ Fidalgosj and honourable men in the fleet to be 
summoned to his ship ; and all being seated on the quarter- 
deck of the shipj which was very well adapted for this pur- 
posoj he caused the Moors to be brought before him, and 
one of them^ who was the chief of the king’s household, 
began to speak in this manner : 

The king of Ormuz^ our lordj says^ that in the affairs 
which have taken place between thee and him^ which have 
produced so many ills, and the destruction of ships and 
men^ he has no excuse to offer thee, for he is young, and 
has never entered into the troubles of war before now; and 
that evil counsels of his governors caused him to reject the 
peace and friendship which thou offeredst him, of which he 
is very sorry ; and he would to God that this repentance of 
his had not cost him and his people and subjecSts so much 
as it has done. That this kingdom belongs to the King of 
Portugal, and he desires to deliver himself up into thy 
hands, and do all thou desirest, and he begs thee to have 
pity upon him and upon this people ; and that thou wilt deal 
with him as a father with a disobedient son, who after his 
repentance pardons him; and that since this kingdom 
belongs to the King of Portugal, he hopes that thou wilt no 
longer desire to destroy this city, for it is in such a plight 
that there is not a house in it wherein are not felt troubles, 
deaths, and misfortunes. And Cogeatar, who is governor 
of the kingdom, and the rulers of the city, send to tell thee 
that they are thy slaves, and that the kingdom is thine, and 
they desire to be at thy command, and do all that thou 
wishest them to do.*’ Afonso Dalboquerque ordered the 
Moors out without answering them, and consulted with the 
captains and Fidalgos who were there present what he 
should do in the matter, and all agreed that he ought to 
receive these offers, and that the Moors should remain in 
the ship until the business was settled with the king. 



124 


COMMENTARIES OF 


CHAPTER XXXIIL 

Of the reply which the great Afonso Dalboquerque gave to the Moors ; 
and how he sent Fero Yaz Dorta, factor, and Jo&o EstSo, and 
Gaspar Rodrigues, interpreter, to. land ; and of what passed with 
the king and his governors. 

The matter having been arranged in the manner I have 
mentioned^ the great Afonso Dalboquerque ordered the 
Moors to be summoned^ and told them before everybody 
that he was very desirous of serving the king provided he 
were willing to obey the King of Portugal^ his lordj as ho 
said he would ; andj in order to put a finish to the matter^ 
he would send Pero Yaz Dorta^ factor of the fleets to speak 
with the king, and he especially would desire them, until 
the man returned with the answer, not to be concerned at 
remaining there in the ship. The Moors replied, that he 
could do as he wished; for they had come of their own 
accord to do whatever he ordered them to do. Afonso 
Dalboquerque sent Pero Vaz Dorta to land, and JoAo EstSo, 
scrivener to the fieet, and Gaspar Rodrigues, the interpreter, 
with him, to tell the king and Cogeatar and the governors 
of the dty, that he, in the name of the most high and 
mighty king D. Manuel, King of Portugal and Lord of the 
Indies, would receive the obedience which he had sent to 
offer; and that, until this was performed in the proper 
manner, he would hold his hand from continuing the war 
with him, so he begged they would conclude the matter 
forthwith, and not let there be pretences in this as there 
had been in past affairs. And after confiding this message 
to Pero Yaz in the presence of all, he withdrew with him 
apart, and told him to keep an eye unawares upon the dis- 
position of the fortress and its entrances and exits, and 
notice how many men the king might have with him, and 
whether there were many pieces of artilleiy and arms, and 
in what order they were. 



AFONSO PALBOQUEBQUE. 


125 


As soon as they were set oat with this message, as Afonso 
Dalboquerqne was not careless of the things which his duty 
required^ and of the charge with which he was entrusted, 
and because he was not sure how this business would turn 
out, he at once commenced to provide himself with every- 
thing that was necessaiy to the attacking of the city, and 
ordered them to collect much timber from the Moorish 
ships to fortify themselves with palisades in whatever part 
of the city they might obtain a footing, and sent a watch 
to reconnoitre all round the island, lest any reinforcements 
of men, water, or provisions should come in from the 
mainland. Pero Yaz and Jofto Estfto went to land, and de- 
livered the message to the king and to Gogeatar ; and, as 
these were very desirous of peace, they forthwith dispatched 
the business. When Pero Yaz Dorta had returned with 
the reply, he said to Afonso Dalboquerqne, in the presence 
of everybody, that the king sent to kiss his hands because 
he was willing to receive them for vassals of the King of 
Portugal, and accept their friendship, and he promised 
always to remain his faithful subject. And Gogeatar had 
sent word that he had been the slave of King Sargol, and 
now was his j and since the king had submitted to him and 
the land was his, he could do as he chose, ;and therefore he 
begged him of his grace to forgive him the punishment he 
rightly deserved for not coming the day before to submit 
himself : for he would swear by his faith that to such a 
course he never consented ; but that the people and some 
Moorish merchant had made him do so, and if they were 
to blame at all in the matter, they should be well repaid 
fbr it. When Afonso Dalboquerqne heard this reply of 
the king and Gogeatar, before ever he would take any 
steps in the matter with the hostages or with the Moors of 
Ourfto, he withdrew with Pero Yaz and Jofto Estfto, and 
enquired of them concerning those things which he had 
desired them to notice. Pero Yaz Dorta told him that the 



126 


COMMENTABIBB OF 


Iring bad about bim some arcbers, and that the fortress 
within was strong and large, bat that for its defence the 
King of Ormuz bad need of more men than those whom 
th^ noticed about him, and that they noticed very good 
artillery of [gan]-metal, but small, and some other of iron ; 
and that he had learned from some Moors, with whom he 
had spoken after taking his leave of the king, that his de- 
termination and that of all those who were with him, was to 
put themselves into their hands and do all he might com- 
mand, and this he himself credited, as he found them very 
much broken down, like people who were conquered and 
overthrown. 

At the receipt of this information from Pero Yaz and 
Jofto Estfto, Afonso Dalboquerque made up his mind to send 
the four Moors, whom he had detained as hostages, to shore, 
to prove whether in these words which the king and Cogea- 
tar had conveyed to him, there lay any malice as in the 
other business now passed, as well as to show them his 
great confidence in them, making a virtue of necessity ; for 
even were they to open the gates, and deliver up the city to 
him, our men were so few, that in the smallest house in 
Ormuz, wherein they could enter,, there would not be more 
men than the enemy would be able to recognise, one from 
the other, and he hoped to remedy this by showing his con- 
fidence in the Moors, lest they should come to know how 
few men he had, and by remaining in his fleet he was more 
powerful and more completely master of the city. Having 
come to this inward oonclnsion, he liberated the hostages, 
and sent word by them to the king and Cogeatar that the 
factor would deliver his reply, and that, as regarded the 
allegiance which the king affirmed they were ready to 
make to the Eling of Portugal, his master, he would receive 
it in his name, and would pardon all that had occurred in 
the past war, as they were willing to be his vassals, and 
acknowledged the land to belong to the King of Portugal, 



AFONSO DALBOQUERQUE. 


127 


and admitted that he might do within it whatever he 
pleasedi therefore in this matter he would do whatever con- 
duced most to the service of the king, his master; and, 
with this message he sent off the hostages. 

Now, when the king saw them, not knowing the reason 
for Afonso Dalboquerque's releasing them after having 
demanded them with much pertinacity, he was not alto- 
gether satisfied at the reply which they brought him. So, 
on the following morning he sent them all four back again, 
to tell the chief captain that he would be vassal to the King 
of Portugal, and was ready to perform whatever was desired 
of him, and in the city and the whole of the kingdom ho 
might command whatever was to the service of the King 
of Portugal, whose liegeman he was ; and he again desired 
pardon for his past error, as he had committed it through 
evil counsel. When Afonso Dalboquerque considered the 
justness of the reply, he was desirous of seizing the oppor- 
tunity, and sent off at once Pero Yaz Dorta to land with 
one of the four hostages, to tell the king that, as he was 
willing to become a loyal subject of the King of Portugal, 
his master, as he affirmed, he would leave him to exercise 
the government of the kingdom in his name, paying a 
reasonable yearly tribute for it, until he further determined 
some more serviceable plan. The king replied, that he 
looked up to him as to a father, and that the kingdom, the 
city, and all its revenues, were his, for he had gained them ; 
so he could order to govern the city whomsoever he would, 
and to such an one he would immediately surrender the 
fortress, and deliver himself up into his hands, and he 
hoped he would not forget that, with great captains, to con- 
quer was to forgive. And Cogeatar sent word to him, 
that he had been the slave of King Sargol, who had been 
King of Ormuz, as he had already sent word, and the king 
had always had great love for him, and had continually 
shown him many kindnesses, for the loyally with which he 



128 


COMMENTAEllBS OF 


had ever served him. Bat when he was guaail in Galayate^ 
the Abyssinians who composed the gaard of the king, who 
was son to King Sargol^ revolted^ and murdered their master 
treasonably^ and plundered all his treasures, and remained 
in possession of the city ; and when he came to know it, he 
had collected people from those parts of the kingdom, and 
came down to Ormuz and overthrew them, and put to 
death all those who were ringleaders of the treason, and set 
up for king this youth, who now reigned, to whom rightly 
pertained the succession to the kingdom, as he was of the 
royal lineage, being son of a blind king, who was there. 
Now, therefore, that he [Afonso] had obtained possession 
of the kingdom, he desired to remain in his service and do 
whatever he desired ; but, if he would not permit it, he 
desired that he might be graciously permitted in his old 
age to go and live at Calayate, his native place, for there 
he desired he might end his days. 


CHAPTER XXXIV. 

How the great Afonso Dalboquerque arranged with the king the tribute 
which was to be paid, and how he demanded space in the city to 
erect a fortress. 

At the receipt of these importunate justifications of the 
king and Oogeatar, Afonso I^lboquerque thought it a good 
opportuniiy to do the best he could for the service of 
the king, D. Manoel ; and he made up his mind to desire 
the king [of Ormuz] to pay a certain tribute to him, and 
upon the settlement of this tribute, to send word, desiring 
space in the city to erect a fortress, because, with a fortresGi 
on land and his fleet on the sea, the afhirs cf Ormuz would 
remain in a more secure condition, and inconvenience and 
trouble would be avoided. On having come to this de- 
termination, his reply to the king and to Cogceatar, through 




AFONSO DALSOQUERQUB. 


129 


the Moors, was that he thoroughly relied upon all they had 
told him, and he would ever preserve this confidence in 
them, from the love he had for the king ; but they were 
to say to Cogeatar that he was much alarmed at his asking 
leave to retire to Calayate ; for one of the principal reasons 
which had induced him to entrust the kingdom to their king 
was that he [Cogeatar] would have to govern it. If, however, 
this could not be so arranged, he would have to make some 
other disposition of it, and it must be on condition of pay- 
ing some settled tribute every year to the King of Portugal, 
his master, towards the expense of a fleet which would have 
to cruise along that coast doing service for the King of 
Ormuz. Cogeatar sent word by the Moors to say that he 
would pay whatever was desired. Afonso Dalboquerque 
replied, that for all that he wanted to know what they could 
pay, and thereupon he would give his opinion. * The king 
replied that he could not name any sum, but, as the whole 
kingdom was his, they would pay whatever he desired. 
When Afonso Dalboquerque perceived that the king was 
intending to make no offer, he sent him word by the factor 
and Jo&o Estfto, that, since he left everything to his arbi- 
tration, it seemed to him, considering the greatness of the 
kingdom, and the nobility of the city, and the large sums 
which the custom house received, and the obligation which 
lay upon the King of Portugal to preserve and defend the 
kingdom from all his enemies — a thing which could not be 
done without great expenses — ^that he ought to pay thirty 
thousand xemjina^ every year as tribute, as well as to make 
good all the expenses which the fleet had incurred up to 
that day. The king, having considered the matter with 
Cogeatar and with his governors, replied, that the kingdom 
was quite ruined and impoverished, so that it was impossible 
to pay this tribute; but he begged very hard that he 
would be graciously pleased to accept six thousand xera- 
> Trinta mil zerafins £1875. See p. 110. 

K 



130 


COMMENTARIES OF 


fins yearly, and five thousand towards the expenses of the 
fieet. 

Afonso Dalboquerqne summoned a meeting of the cap- 
tains, and informed them what tribute the King of Ormuz 
proposed to pay, and asked them to decide for him whether 
to accept it. The captains began to give their opinions in 
favour of accepting the king^s promised tribute, being firmly 
set in the desire they had that the affairs of Ormuz should 
not affect their departure for India, whereon they had set 
their hearts. So Afonso Dalboquerqne dissembled with 
them, and told them to look well to what they said; for 
the kingdom of Ormuz was veiy large, and the trade of 
that city would increase more and more ; and, as the king- 
dom now belonged to the king D. Manuel, his master, 
gained by force with his fleet, it would be unreasonable to 
let it off with so small a tribute, for even with thirty thou- 
sand xerajina^ as he had originally demanded, he should not 
remain satisfied, so very valuable were the revenues of the 
kingdom. Nevertheless, the captains, in spite of all these 
argfuments and others which he gave them, adhered to what 
they had said. And Afonso Dalboqnerque, clearly per- 
ceiving that they desired to damage the business, no longer 
cared to ask tfaeir opinion about it, since, in spite of seeing 
that the king was willing to do all that was required by 
them of him, they advised that the kingdom should be de- 
livered to him with such a small tribute. Tet, lest the 
matter should come to be known, and also that the gover- 
nors of the land should be more willing to g^nt him space 
to make a fortress, which was what he* desired more than 
anything else, he determined to fix for them a fair tribute, 
and to do this in such a manner, that there should always 
remain to the Kings of Portugfd the right of increasing it 
whenever they chose, since the land was theirs, conquered 
by their captains and men with a great outlay of their trea- 
sure. So he sent word to the king that, on account of his 



AFONSO DALBOQUERQUE. 


131 


dasire to serve him, he was content that he should pay every 
year fifteen thousand xerafins of tribute to the king D. 
Manuel (provided he were willing to receive them), and to 
all his successors, and that he should give forthwith five 
thousand xerafins in hard cash {mortos) towards the ex- 
penses of the fleet ; but that the merchandise coming from 
Portugal to the factory should be free of duty, and that 
bought by the Portuguese in Ormuz and in its ports should 
not pay more duty than that which the natives of the land 
paid. And, in addition to these conditions, he appointed 
others which seemed serviceable to the king, D. Manuel ; 
and with them the king and Cogeatar and all the governors 
were quite content to receive the kingdom, and government 
of it, at the hands of Afonso Dalboquerqne, in the name of 
the King of Portugal. And of this treaty they^ made two 
copies, the one in leaf-gold, of the size of a sheet of paper, 
made up like a book, written in Arabic, with letters en- 
graved upon it, and its binding of gold, with three golden 
seals hanging appended by chains, namely, the seals of the 
king, of Cogeatar, his governor, and of the city; the other, 
by the king's desire, in Persian, which is the common lan- 
guage of the land, written on paper, with letters of gold and 
stops bine. Both these copies were sent by Afonso Dalbo- 
querque, placed in silver caskets, to the king, D. Manuel, 
and the same ought to be in the Torre do Tombo,^ unless by 
some carelessness they have allowed an antiquity like this, 
worthy of high remembrance, to perish. And Afonso Dal- 
boqnerque gave another copy to the same puq)ose to the 
King of Ormuz, written by Jofto Estfto, scrivener to the 
fleet, conformably to the power entrusted by the king, D. 
Manuel, to him in his instructions, signed by him, and 
sealed with the signet of the king’s arms. 

> Thenameof the Principal Bepositoiy of Public Beourda in Lubon. 



132 


COMMBNTABIES OF 


CHAPTER XXXV. 

How the Ring of Ormuz sent to ask of Afonso Dalboquerque a flag to 
be placed on bis palace in ngn of peace, and what was done in the 
matter. 

The agreement having been thns concladed^ the king 
sent to ask fonso Dalboquerque for a flag to place upon 
his palace in sign of peace and friendship ; but^ as there 
was no flag in the fleet which could be sent, he ordered the 
factor to go on shore and prepare one of white satin with a 
cross of Christas. And when it was finished, he sent word 
to the king by Jofto EstSo, that the flag was ready, and he 
might order Cogeatar and Rexnordim,^ and the governors 
and officials of the city, and all the populace, to come down 
to the edge of the water to receive it with great rejoicings. 
He requested, too, that on that day no one should be per- 
mitted to work in the city, and that order should be given 
to get ready horses for the use of the captains, fldalgos, and 
servants of the king ; and he told Jofto Estfto that when he 
had given this message to the king, he should make a hasly 
visit to the ships, and acquaint everybody that they were to 
come on board the flagship, to start thence with their boats 
very well equipped, and that he should tell the masters to 
deck out the ships with gay flags, and to see that the con- 
stables of the gunners gave directions for loading all the 
artilleiy, and, as soon as the flag reached land, to give the 
order to fire. He also commanded Jorge Bai^eto de Crasto 
to make himself ready to cany the flag. 

When all was in trim, on one Monday morning early, on 
the tenth day of October, 1507, the captains came in their 
boats on board the flagship, and then and there Afonso 
Dalboquerque handed over the flag to Jorge Barreto, and 

' This appeal's to be the Arabic ^ ar-iats Nflr ad-dia**, or “ er-rets 
Nflr ed-dia’*, the Rets, or chief, Riir ed-din” (t.e., the Light of the 
Faith). 



AFONSO DALBOQUEKQUB. 


133 


told Pero Vaz Dorta and Jofto Estfto what part they were 
to play^ and the order they were to maintain as they carried 
the flag to the city. So« haring set out all together in the 
boats, with flags flying and corered with carpets^ and firing 
shots from the prow^ they came to land where were already 
awaiting them on the beach Cogeatar and Beznordim^ and 
the governors and principal men of the city, %nd the popu- 
lace, with many horses for our men, well harnessed after 
their own fashion. And Jorge BaiTeto rode on in front of 
all, oariying the flag in his hands ; and when he had raised 
it, then began at once the firing of artilleiy from the ships 
and boats. And when all were mounted they traversed the 
principal street of the town, and in front of all went all the 
people with many native mnsical instruments, shouting from 
time to time: — ''Portugal, Portugal I and, as the people 
were numerous, it seemed as if the world were eome to an 
end, with their cries. Just behind the people came the flag, 
and Cogeatar, Bexnordim, and all the governors of the city, 
went close alongside of it, and the captains and fidalgos of 
the fleet followed ; and in this order they p&ssed through 
the principal street of the city, and tamed into another 
straight to the palace, where the king was waiting for them 
on foot. Then all dismounted, and Jorge Barreto handed 
the flag over to the king, who gave it with his own hands 
to the governors to take, and thus they proceeded to place 
it on the loftiest tower of his palace ; and when the vessels 
caught sight of it, they began again to fire off salutes of 
all their artillery. 

And of this delivery Jo&o Estfto prepared instruments, 
which the king, Cogeatar, and Bexnordim, with all the chief 
men of the city, signed : and the business having been thus 
concluded, the captains took their leave of the king, and 
proceeded to embark in their boats, and went on board 
Afonso Dalboquerque’s vessel, and recounted to him all that 
hod taken place, and the great triumph with which they 



134 


COMMVNTARIES OF 


had carried the flag through the city, whereat he was 
highly pleased, and rendered many thanks to Our Lord for 
permitting him to accomplish that matter according to his 
desires. On the following day the Moors sent to ask if he 
would permit them to take down the flag from the tower 
and take care of it. Afonso Dalboquerque gave his per- 
mission, and told them to take good care of it, because he 
hoped in God that under it he would have to assist the 
king in regaining many places and fortresses from the 
neighbouring kings who had always been at war with him. 
The king replied that he was the vassal of the King of 
Portugal, and this was sufiicient to deter anyone from 
daring to trouble him. And because the document which 
Jofto Est&o had drawn up concerning the delivery of the 
flag had not been sworn to, Afonso Dalboquerque ordered 
him and Pero Yaz Dorta to proceed to the shore and tell 
the king, that he, and Cogeatar, and Bexnordim, and all the 
governors of the city, were to swear upon their Alcorflo to 
keep and maintain all that they had signed ; and the king 
was much pleased at this, and all were sworn accordingly, 
and Jofto EstAo prepared hereupon documents and letters 
testificatory, which Afonso Dalboquerque forwarded to the 
king, D. Manuel. 


CHAPTER XXXVL 

How the great Afonso Dalboqueiqae had an audience with tlie king on 
the jetty, and what passed in these visits, and what took place with 
the sailors in the sea with the dead Moors, whose bodies floated on 
the water. 

When the factor and Joflo Estflo had taken their leave of 
the king, after the documents had been sworn to, he in- 
formed them that he was very desirous of seeing Afonso 
Dalboqaerquo ; and asked them to tell him on his part that 



AFONSO DALBOQUKRQUie. 


136 


he begged he would gi'aciously send word where^ and in 
what manner, he might see him. Afonso Dalboquerque 
sent word to him^ saying that he also was very desirous of 
seeing him, and that there was no other place more suited 
for their interview than the jetty ; for it was upon the sea, 
and was well adapted for their visit; but the rest could 
be arranged as he liked best. At this message from Afonso 
Dalboquerque, the king at once gave orders for his officers 
to make ready the jetty, which was all covered with many 
carpets, and around were carpeted benches, and there was 
a platform with two chairs of silk and cushions of the same 
suite. The day having been settled on which the audience 
was to take place, Afonso Dalboquerque ordered the captains 
to make themselves ready with their boats richly decorated, 
and all the lidalgos that there were in the fleet to accom- 
pany him ; for it was in this manner that they had agreed 
Afonso Dalboquerque should go, as well as the king, with his 
governors and principal lords of his kingdom, who had 
come thither to serve him in the war. And when all were 
ready, Afonso Dalboquerque went on board his boat and the 
captains on board theirs, and aU proceeded to the jetty, and 
when they touched it all the artillery of the ships was fired. 
As soon as the king was informed of the landing of ALfonso 
Dalboquerque he came forth to receive him, accompanied 
by Cogeatar, Bexnordim, and all the others who were to be 
pi^esent. 

Afonso Dalboquerque being now with the king, they 
treated each other with great courtesy, and thereupon sat 
down in the chairs, and the fidalgos and captains on the 
benches on the right hand, and Cogeatar, Bexnordim, and 
the lords who came with the king, on the benches on the 
left hand. At this time the king would be about the age of 
fifteen years, well fashioned, and of good appearance, rather 
short, dressed in a petticoat of crimson satin in the native 
costume, with a white cap upon his head, and a cloth girded 



136 


COMMEKTABIES OF 


around him^ and a golden dagger^ and a sceptre of gold in 
his hand with the head of crystal^ set in gold. As soon as 
the; were seated^ Afonso Dalboqnerqne said to the king^ 
through Oaspar Rodriguez^ the interpreter, that he was 
much rejoiced to see him for the love which he bore him, 
and for the great obedience and respect which he had 
shown towards the afiairs of the king, D. Manuel, his lord ; 
and he begged graciously that he would always remain his 
loyal and true vassal, and thus acknowledge the benefit he 
had received from *him in the king^s name, seeing that he 
had restored to him the government of the kingdom and his 
estate as before. The king replied, that he was fully aware 
of the benefit which had been granted to him in the name 
of the King of Portugal, and he would always be his vassal, 
and remain in obedience under him; and after many speeches 
had passed, Afonso Dalboquerque, being desirous of taking 
his leave of the king, begged of Cogeatar and Rexnordim, 
and all the other lords, that they would be willing again in 
his presence to ratify and swear to the agreement they had 
made, for he also wished to be a witness of it ; and they 
did so at once. This being completed, he took his leave of 
the king and all the lords, and proceeded to embark, and 
the king gave him a girdle of gold and a dagger ornamented 
with gold, and a horse very richly caparisoned, and two 
pieces of jewelled brocade, and to the captains and fidalgos 
he gave each a piece of silk. And from that time forward 
our people began to go backwards and forwards ; for, up to 
that day, Afonso Dalboquerque had not permitted them to 
do so ; and the king and all were so pleased that peace was 
concluded, seeing that the war had cost them so dearly, that 
they were happy to show all manner of politeness to the 
fidalgos and cavaliers who went on shore to amuse them- 
selves, and they ordered that there should always be horses 
ready saddled for them to ride to the city. 

At this time, eight days having already elapsed since the 



AFOKSO DALBOQUEBQUB. 


137 


battle on the sea, there appeared on the top of the water 
many dead bodies of those Moors who had cast themselves 
overboard on the day of the fight, as well as of many others 
who had died in the vessels at various parts. A cabin boy, 
who was in the boat of Antonio do Campu, seized hold of 
one with a boat-hook as it floated alongside, and as it 
seemed to him well clothed be began to strip it, and found 
on it money and a silver dagger. When the sailors of the 
other ships were aware of this, they set out in the boats 
about this part of the sea fishing for bodies, and stripped 
all those that they met with, and found on them money, 
short broadswords {terQados)^ poniards {agomicts), mounted 
with gold, and silver, and jewels of people of quality and 
honour; and this went on for eight days, during which 
time the sailors made a good harvest. And on these dead 
Moors, who might be upwards of eighty in* number, they 
found many arrows stuck into their bodies, of the wounds 
of which they had died, without having any other wounds 
of our weapons; for there was not in the whole fleet a single 
person who had a bow or any arrow, or knew how to make 
use of them.' It seems that Our Lord desired on that day 
to perform this miracle that he might show the captains, 
who shrank from engaging in this business, how certain a 
victory over their enemies they have who fight with true 
faith against infidels. And because the tide carried these 
corpses to shore, it caused to the inhabitants of the city a 
renewal of their past misfortunes; for some found there 
their sons, others their husbands and relations and friends, 
whom they proceeded to bury, with such great lamentationB 
and weepings that it caused us great pain to hear them. 

> Camdes mentiona this dxcanistaiice in the stsnia already quoted at 
page 64. 



138 


OOMHEMTABUB OV 


CHAPTER XXXVII. 

How the great Afonso Dalboquerque sent to beg of the king space in 
Ormuz to build a fortress, and what passed thereat, and how it 
was commenced where it now stands. 

The assurances were now all settled on either side^ and 
the tribute-money paid^ as I have said ; so Afonso Dalbo- 
querque determined to erect a fortress in Ormuz^ as without 
it^ it seemed to him that the af&iirs of the kingdom could 
not be thoroughly safe. And having decided upon this, he 
sent word to the king by the factor^ that the king, D. 
Manuel, his lord, had ordered him, in his written instruc- 
tions, that when he had gained by conquest any place or 
city in those parts, he was to render it secure with a strong 
fortresfi^ and bear in mind the treason and evildoings which 
the Kings of Calicut and CoulBo had committed against his 
captains after an agreement of peace had been made and 
signed between them. Therefore, because he was desirous of 
avoiding these inconveniences, as well as of rendering the 
goods and people of the King of Portugal in the place more 
secure, he begged he would graciously take this in good 
part, and advise him where he should build this fortress. 
The king, being prompted by Cogeatar, replied that he 
excused his demand, for all belonged to the King of Por- 
tugal, and as for advising him whereabouts he might build 
it, in his opinion it would be best to do so in the island 
of Qneixome or that of Turumbaque ; for they were places 
where there was water. But if he desired to build it for 
the defence of Ormuz, it would be placed better in the port 
of Naband^,^ which was on the mainland, than in any other 
place. Now, although it was the intention of Afonso Dal- 
boquerque to build it in Ormuz, where it now stands, yet, 
to dissemble with Cogeatar, and show him that he did not 

^ Perhaps Nobenil, on the eastern coast of the Fenian Gulf. 



AFONSO DALBOQUEBQUE. 


139 


care to build it more in one place than another^ he ordered 
Afonso Lopez da Costa with two armed boatSj to survey the 
port of Nabandd, and gave him many stuffs from Cambaya 
to present to the principal merchants of the place. So 
Afonso Lopez da Costa set ont^ and on arriving at the port 
all the people of the country came down to receive him^ with 
many earthen jars of water, melons, sweet apples {morgana), 
and other native fruits. 

And after he had inspected the site, and divided the 
stuffs which he carried among those honourable men, he 
returned with his report to Afonso Dalboquerque, canying 
him a present of fruits, which one of the honourable Moors 
of the place sent him ; and he told him that the site of Nti- 
bandd was open sandy land, and close to the port there was 
three fathoms^ depth of water, and from thence to Ormuz 
was about five leagues all shelving rock, which -began at 
twenty fathoms and gradually diminished towards the port, 
and the water which the Moors used was removed a good 
distance from the sea-shore. On the day after Afonso 
Lopes da Costa had returned with this information respect- 
ing the port of Nabandd, there arrived D. Antonio da 
Noronha, who had been with two pilots to the island of 
Queixome to survey the port whence the Moors carried 
water to the city ; and he told Afonso Dalboquerque that 
in the island there was a large place along the shore of the 
sea, in which the king had some houses, now old apd 
tumbling down ; and the water which was taken thence to 
Ormuz was from some wells which were some distance off 
from the shore, and all round the island was shelving rock 
of shallow bottom. While Afonso Dalboquerque was en- 
gaged in this discourse with D. Antonio, Cogebeirame 
arrived from shore, and told him that one league from the 
city of Ormuz there was a place called Turumbaque, and he 
ought to send some persons to survey it; for it might 
happen that he would be glad to construct the fortress 



140 


COMMENTARIES OF 


there. And^ although Afonso Dalboquerque was well aware 
that this Moor had been privately instructed in his part by 
Cogeatar^ yet he dissembled with him and told him that he 
wished to go in person and look at the place. So^ having 
sent off the Moor, he ordered Francisco de Tavora, Antonio 
do Campo^ and Manuel Teles^ to make ready to accompany 
him ; andj on the following morning, they set forth early, 
and as they had a head wind, it cost them some trouble to 
arrive at Torumbaque, from which port the Cape of Ma^an- 
dom is visible. 

When Afonso Dalboquerque had now seen by himself 
and by the captains all the places which Gogeatar had 
offered him for the constrifction of the fortress, he gave an 
account of it to some persons in the fleet privately, whose 
honour he could trust, and whom he knew to be desirous of 
serving the king, D. Manuel, in everything. And having 
discussed the matter with them, and without giving any 
account of it to the captains (on whom he no longer had 
any reliance by reason of what had taken place with them), 
all came to the conclusion that, as they had to erect a for- 
tress in those parts, it ought to be placed within Ormuz ; 
for there it would be of more service to the King of Portu- 
gal when made than in the other places which Gogeatar had 
suggested. Having, therefore, made up his mind, Afonso 
Dalboquerque sent word by the factor to the king that he 
had caused an inspection to be made of all the places pro- 
posed to him for the site of the fortress, and by the in- 
formation he had received concerning them, looking well at 
the conveniences and inconveniences likely to accrue to 
each, it appeared to him more useful that it should be 
erected on the point of Morona than in any other place ; 
for, besides that it would be situated there between two 
good ports, one to the east and the other to the west, it 
would conduce greatly to the safety of his state to have 
the Portuguese very close to himself. The king gave 



AFONSO DALBOQUEBQUE. 


141 


an account of this message to his father the blind king^ to 
Cogeatar^ and to Bexnordim^ and to the goyemors of the 
land^ and as all were desirous of peace^ they were well 
content with it; and he replied to Afonso Dalboquerque, 
that he was quite willing, from the desire he had of retain- 
ing his friendship, to give him the site he wished for to 
erect a fortress, and that he might send to commence the 
works as soon as he chose. 

At this reply of the king, Afonso Dalboquerque was very 
much pleased, and sent word to Gogeatar that he should 
cause to be handed over to him all the masons there might 
be in the city, and eveiythiug else that might be required 
for the progress of the work, and servants in sufficient 
number ; for he wished to commence it at once, and on his 
part he would pay whatever the king demanded. Gogeatar 
foi'thwith caused all the necessaries to be provided ; and 
because enemies who are governed by force, if opportunity 
arise, scheme for their liberty, Afonso Dalboquerque was 
unwilling to put his whole trust in Gogeatar, and desired 
D. Antonio de Noronha, his nephew, to remain on land 
with eighty of the principid men in the fleet, for the secu- 
rity of the people engaged upon the work, and to keep 
along the shore two boats armed with artillery at the prow, 
which were to remain there always, close to the shore, 
ready to assist whenever there might be need of them. He 
ordered also to be moored there a parao, well covered over 
with an awning because of the heat, wherein he and all the 
other fldalgos and cavaliers might remain completing all 
the things necessaiy for the work, and he gave orders to 
Antonio do Gampo to bring up his ship and anchor dose 
to this parcLO to assist in ell this. And that the men who 
were on land should not go by night about the city doing 
things at which the people might be scandalised, he enjoined 
upon D. Antonio that he was to go every night with all the 
men and sleep on the ship and on the paroo, and keep a 



142 


COMMENTARIES OF 


good look out from thence. He appointed^ as master of 
this workj a gunner named Fernfto Datvarez^ a good officer 
at the business, and arranged that the captains, two at a 
time, should take care to bring down stone from the quarry 
for the work. 

When all these things had been settled, Afonso Dalbo- 
querque went on shore with all the people of the fleet, and 
began to lay out the foundations of the principal tower on 
the twenty-fourth day of the month of October, in the year 
fifteen hundred and seven ; and, as this tower was to be so 
high that one might from it have a view of all the mainland 
on the Persian side, he ordered the foundations to be laid 
very broadly, and in the same manner ordered them to set 
the walls of the fortress, to which he gsve the name of 
'^Nossa Senhora da Victoria” ("Our Lady of the Victory**). 
When once the work was begun, Afonso Dalboquerqne 
made great haste to finish the tower, for his intention was, 
as soon as Jannaiy was come, to go and take a view of the 
Bed Sea, and he wanted to leave this tower finished up to 
the first story, that within it the Portuguese might defend 
themselves from all the men in Persia who could come, 
until his return to Ormuz. And in order that the workmen 
should do their duty with a better will, besides paying them 
every day that which Cogeatar had agreed on as their 
wages, he ordered that all who worked should be supplied 
with water and as many dates as they chose for nothing, 
and all were so pleased with this, that many came and 
laboured ait the work without being sent by Cogeatar; and 
what with this, and what with the diligence which the cap- 
tains and fidalgos showed in the service, the work began 
to increase very much in a short time. And he ordered 
that the principal portal of this tower should be made of 
three anchors of stone from the ship Meri, which was taken 
at that place, and the Moors would have £pven for them 
much money, but Afonso Dalboquerque was unwilling to 



AFONSO DALBOQUERQUE. 


143 


'give them up, but ordered them to be built up into the 
portal of the tower, that remembrance might remain for 
ever of the great victory gained there by the Portuguese. 


CHAPTER XXXVIIT. 

How the great Afonso Dalboquerqae made his fleet ready to go and 
take a view of the strait of the Red Sea, and of the reply he gave to 
Rexnordim concerning the tribute which the Ambassador of Xequo 
lamad came to demand. 

When the great Afonso Dalboquerque perceived the 
willingness and quiet with which the natives laboured at 
the work (which was not to be seen ainong the Portuguese, 
to many of whom it seemed a very unnecessary thing that the 
fortress should bo built), in order the more to develop this 
friendly feeling with the native Moors, he ordered Pero Vaz 
Dorta, factor of the fleet, to take some of the houses in 
the city, wherein he was to collect all the merchandise which 
he brought, to begin the trade between us and the Moors, 
and he was to sell all the merchandise at a cheap rate, in 
order to attract them, through their cupidity, the more into 
friendliness towards us; and he gave him as scriveners, 
Pedralvjarez, gentleman of the royal chamber, and Lizuarte 
de Freitas, and Antonio Fernandes Tassalho, servant of the 
Count of Villa Nova. And in order that the men who were 
on shore should always keep together to defeat the malicious 
designs of Cogeatar, he ordered the captains to prepare the 
mesa for the men, according to their allowances, and each 
one was to have a man who should go and purchase all that 
was required, and this one could go about the city, having 
a written paper from the captain, but no other could go ; 
and to execute all these things he made Martim Vaz an 
inspector, with twelve men, commanding him to take into 
custody every Portuguese who might be found without a 



144 


C0MMENTABIB8 OF 


permit in the city ; and if he found any of those who had 
to go to market, with the writing of his captain, doing any- 
thing whereby the Moors might be scandalised, he was to 
seize him, and carry him before him for a sound flogging. 

All these matters, then, being arranged in this order^ as 
well as many others too tedious to narrate, Afonso Dalbo- 
querque determined to careen all the ships of his fleet, and 
refit them with masts, yards, and shrouds, for all were 
worn out with the length of time that he had been in the 
sea ; but as he did not put any trust in Gogeatar (inasmuch 
as, in the audiences he had with him, and in the completion 
which he had to give to all the arrangements that were 
necessary, he showed he did not deserve it), he instructed 
Jofto Bedondo, chief carpenter, not to lay up more than one 
ship at a time, and when that was finished and mended, 
and fitted with all that it stood in need of, to lay up an- 
other, so that if Gogeatar were to set in motion any treason, 
and they lost one ship, the others might remain to look 
after themselves. And, with foresight of this kind, carefully 
concealed, without letting anyone know it he proceeded in 
the work of repairing his ships and refitting them in all they 
required, just as if they were then setting out from Portu- 
gal ; and simultaneously with this he ordered them to con- 
struct a galley (fuata) of eighteen banks of oars, meaning to 
avail himself of it on entering the strait of the Bed Sea. 
And when he saw his fleet in this order, he had more happi- 
ness than at all the victories which he had gained in that 
kingdom against the Moors ; for now that he had it thus 
repaired, he feared no longer the arrival of the fleet which 
was expected from Sal,^ however great it might be. 

Now, while he was prosecuting this labour, Bexnordim 
came to speak with him at the parao wherein he was, and 

^ A vinda da Armada do Sal; perhaps this last word, which I am un- 
able to identify with any place in the neighbourhood of Persia, is an 
error of the editions for Sulj the South. 



AFONSO DALBOQUBRQUE. 


145 


told him on the king’s behalf, that from the opposite or 
further side of the mainland there had arrived a captain of 
Xeque Ismael, accompanied by horsemen, to demand the 
tribute which he was obliged to render to him eveiy year; 
but knowing that he was there, building that fortress, he 
had not dared to proceed to Ormuz, but had sent from 
thence to demand the tribute from him ; and he begged, 
therefore, he would tell him what he should do. Afonso 
Dalboqnerqne replied, that he might tell the king that this 
kingdom of Ormuz belonged to the King of Portugal, 
gained by his fleet and his men, and that he might know of 
a certainty that if any tribute should be paid to any other 
king, except the king D. Manoel, his lord, he would take 
the government of the kingdom and give it to someone 
who would not be afraid of the Xeque Ism|iel. , He then 
sent to the ships for cannon-balls, guns, matbhlocks, and 
grenades, and told him to say to the king that he might 
send all these to the captain of the Xeque Ismael, for that 
was the sort of money wherewith the King of Portugal had 
ordered his captain to pay the tribute of that kingdom 
that was under his mastery and command ; he, for his part, 
would promise him, that as soon as the fortress, was com- 
pleted, he would enter the Persian straits and render tribu- 
tary to the King of Portugpd, his master, all the places 
which the Xeque Ismael held on that shore, and when he 
got there they might demand the tribute due from the King 
of Ormuz; for he would pay it to them in very good money. 

As soon as Bexnordim had returned with this reply, it 
occurred to Afonso Dalboqnerqne that it would be neces- 
sary to content him and Cogeatar, and the three chief 
Moors with whom the king took counsel ; for if these were 
contented and in his favour, as they were of the king’s 
council, he would be able to get from him all he desired. 
So he made ready certain pieces of silver and red scarlet, 
and vermilion, and many rich cloths which he had taken 

L 



146 


C0MMENTABIJS8 OF 


from the prize ships, and some things ho had brought from 
Portugal ; and through Jo9o Estilo, scrivener to the fleet, 
who carried the present, he sent word, saying he desired to 
be pardoned for sending so small a gift, for it was sent by 
one who had been on the sea for upwards of two years, 
but ho had ventured to do it by reason of the great friend- 
ship which he had towards them. They received the gifts 
with great delight, and sent him many thanks for them. 


CHAPTER XXXIX. 

How the King of Ormuz sent word to Afonso Dalboquerqne, saying that 
he desired to see the Portuguese mudLeteers lire a volley, and how it 
was done ; and how Afonso Di^boqueique w^ote to the Viceroy of 
India concerning the state of affairs in Ormuz, and what took place 
with the captains. 

Bexnordim became so dejected at the idea of the bold- 
ness wherewith Afonso Dalboqnerqne had answered him, 
that as soon as he reached the king, they immediately pre- 
pared a g^ard-boat, wherein they sent a Moor with all those 
things sent by Afonso Dalboqnerqne, to be gpven to the 
captain of Xeqne Ismael on his part ; and the messenger 
was to undeceive him, and show him that they could not 
pay any tribute to Xeqne Ismael, as the kingdom was in 
the possession of the King of Portugal. Six or seven days 
after this had taken place, the king sent word for Caspar 
Rodriguez, the interpreter, and told him to say to Afonso 
Dalboqnerqne, his &ther, that he was very desirous of seeing 
his musketeers fire a volley, and gpraciously requested they 
might be sent to him some day. Now, as Afonso Dalbo- 
querque was always on the alert against the evil desires 
and malice of Gdgeatar, he sent round word to all the cap- 
tains in their ships, to make ready two hundred and fifty 
ci'osabowmen and musketeers of the youngest and best 



AFONSO DALDOQUBRQUE. 


147 


drilled, and who knew very well how to fire ; for he wished 
to show Cogeatar how much more power he had than what 
our men conld have informed him of. For he was well 
aware of the coldness wherewith Cogeatar entered into the 
negotiations, as he was very sorry he had granted them a 
site for the construction of the fortress, since he had learned 
from the Portuguese with whom he conversed, that in the 
fleet there were very few men ; and it was in this particular 
manner he desired to be more clearly informed of the truth. 

Afonso Dalboquerque, perceiving these projects of Coge- 
atar all taking their origin from his accursed obstinacy, 
kept continually dissembling with him ; yet, to comply with 
the king’s wishes, he ordered some barriers to be erected 
along the wall of the fortress, and made them supply the 
crossbowmen and musketeers with all that was necessary 
for carrying out the design, advising also i). Antonio de 
Noronha, his nephew, who was on land, to look to them, 
and not permit anyone to fire except those who knew best 
how to do so. And when all was ready, he ordered Caspar 
Bodrignez, the interpreter, to go and present these men to 
the king, and tell him that with these youths and many such 
others, whom the king, his master, would send him from 
Portugal, he hoped, with God^s aid, to procure for him the 
restitution of all those places which his neighbours had 
taken from him. When the crossbowmen had reached the 
spot where the barriers had been placed, the king catne 
down to see them from a terrace of his palace, and they 
fired so well, that they seemed masters of their business. 

The king, after seeing them fire, took bis leave of them, 
and sent word to Afonso Dalboquerque that he was highly 
pleased at the sight, and that for a long time he had not 
seen anything more to his liking ; and he desired him 
of his favour, if he had not made any other arrangement 
respecting the ship JUen, to give him the refusal of her^ and 
a pass that she might sail from Cambaya to Ormuz ; for the 



148 


COMMENTARIES OE 


city was so straitened, that it would be necessary to col- 
lect merchandise from one part after another to the custom- 
house, in order with the proceeds of it to be able to supply 
the expenditure that they had been put to. He also beg- 
ged he would order to be returned to him some of his 
Moorish servants, who had been taken prisoners in the late 
war, and ho would pay whatever ransom might be demanded 
for them. Cogeatar too sent word, begging of him another 
vessel, and some women and children, his servants, who 
were prisoners in possession of our men. 

Afonso Dalboquerque ordered all these to be given to 
him, without receiving any payment in return, continually 
dissembling with Cogeatar, because he desired to finish the 
fortress. A Moorish captain of one of the ships belonging 
to the King of Onor, becoming informed of the liberality of 
Afonso Dalboquerque towards the king and Cogeatar, pro- 
ceeded to speak to him, and told him that he was from the 
kingdom of Onor,^ with which the Viceroy was at peace, as 
might be seen from two passes of D. Lonrengo, his son, which 
he produced, and that at the time of his arrival at this port 
with his fleet, he (the captain) was discharging his cargo, 
but Cogeatar had taken his ship from him by force, and 
filled it with soldiers and artillexy ; and since he was in no 
blame, but had been forcibly deprived of it, as might be 
learned from Cogeatar, he begged as a favour that it might 
be ordered to be returned to him. And, although the 
Moor had but small right in what he begged, Afonso Dal- 
boquerque wished to preserve inviolate the safe pass of D. 
Lourenqo, and ordered the restitution to be made, and a 
safe pass that the ship might make the voyage ; and by this 
Moor he forwarded a letter to the Viceroy, giving him an 
account of what he had done, and the determination he had 
come to, begging him at once to send reinforcement of men, 

* Uonore, or Honawar, in the Bombay Presidency, 14 deg. 17 min. 
N., 74 deg. 27 min. E. 



AVONSO DALDOQUBRQUE. 


149 


small vessels, galleys^ and munitions of war^ and adding 
that he did not send this despatch by one of his own ships, 
by reason of the great need he had for them. Of this letter 
he gave a private relation to Antonio do CSampo, who kept 
the secret so well that Cogeatar forthwith learned all abont 
it, and all the things which he had sent to beg of the Vice- 
roy, and all the other intentions he had. The captains also, 
and fidalgos of the fleet, because Antonio do Campo gave 
them to understand that in the letter there were many things 
prejudicial to them (though really not so), became veiy 
wroth with Afonso Dalboquerque ; and because of the de- 
sires they entertained of going to India, already being 
wearied with the labours of that war, they began henceforth 
to do things which disgusted him. 


CHAPTER XL. 

Of the speech which the great Afonso Dalboqaerque made to the cap- 
tains upon the insubordination which they eyinced; and of the com- 
plaints they made to him; and of some words that passed with 
them thereupon. 

When the month of Januaiy was come, wherein the great 
Afonso Dalboquerque had determined to make his way to 
the Straits, the chief tower being already in a sufficiently 
forward state to be able to protect itself, and his fleet filled 
with all things necessary for the journey, he ordered Manuel 
Telez to load his ship with all the provisions that could bo 
procured, to relievo the fortress of ^ocotora on the way, 
and with some medicines and drugs for the sick. And he 
ordered the factor to purchase all the goods which Manuel 
Telez put down on a roll ; which he did with great dili- 
gence, and laded the ship, and handed over everything to 
the master in the presence of the scrivener. When Afonso 
Dalboquerque had despatched the factor to set about this 



150 


COMMBNTABIES OB 


business^ he weut On shore to see the progress of the for- 
tress, and the captains went immediately to him ; and^ as 
he had for some time past been aware that they mnrmnred 
at the construction of the fortress^ that he might be more 
certain of their intentions^ he drew himself away along the 
shore with Manuel Telez^ Francisco de TavorUj and Afonso 
Lopez diB GostSj who were there^ Jorge Barreto do Castro 
his epusitt being also present^ and said to them^ that they 
now saw in what a state the afiairs at Ormuz were, situated 
and he .would beg them to tell him whether it was more 
serviceable to the king to finish the fortress or to sail for 
the Cape of Onardafum^ for he had the fleet all ready and 
well prepared for the one course or the other. 

The captains replied, that they were quite well aware of 
the state of affairs at Ormuz; but, neverthelessj in their 
opinion, it would be of more service to the king for them to 
make their way to the Cape of Onardafum, and lie in wait 
for the ships coming from India with spices for the Straits, 
than to stay building a fortress, which, as soon as it was 
left, wonld be taken by the Moors; and even if he left men 
in it they could not be sufficient in number to be able to 
defend it from the power of the King of Ormnz; Jorge 
Barreto, howeyer^ was of opinion that he ought to insure 
the safety of aflbirs at Ormnz^ and complete the fortress 
which he had commenced; for it was a very important 
business in the service of the King of Portugal. Afonso 
Dalboqnerque sided with this advice of Jorge Barreto, 
though he would not disclose to him any of his own inten- 
tions. And when Afonso Lopez; da Costa perceived that 
Afonso Dalboqnerque agreed with the opinion given by 
Jorg^ Baireto, he beg^n to have ang^y words with him, and 
told him that this business was so important and of such 
weight, that it was imperative to set about it with slowness 
and circumspection ; and since Antonio do Campo, and 
Jofto da Nova were not present^ he oughf to send for them. 



AFONSO DALBOQUKBQUE. 


151 


and all being by^ to arrange wbat should be done^ because^ 
in his opinion^ it was bad policy to retain Ormuz. Afonso 
Dalboquerque dissembled with him^ and walked away to 
the parao, where he had taken up his quarters now some 
time^ without giving him a word in reply. Afonso Lopez 
da Gosta^ and Francisco de Tavoraj and Manuel Telez^ were 
so disheartened at this conversation^ and at the small ac- 
count Afonso Dalboquerque had made of them^ that they 
proceeded to coalesce with Jofto da Nova and with Antonio 
do Campo forthwith ; and on the morning of the following 
day they sent him a written remonstrance (by no means 
necessary)^ whereat Afonso Dalboquerque was much an- 
noyed; yetj from his urgent desire of completing the affairs 
at Ormuzj he dissembled with them, and destroyed the re- 
monstrance without punishing them for it, as they deserved; 
but, with great forbearance, he sent word to them by Jofto 
Estfto that he begged they would so keep secret the state of 
affiiirs, that Cogeatar might not come to know of it, for 
they were at a point when it behoved them very much for 
the service of the King of Portugal to remain all of them 
of one mind and one will; for Cogeatar was so discreet, 
and possessed such means of obtaining information about 
eveiyihing, that he knew very well how much they desired 
to leave their enterprise there, and proceed to India, and 
that they had advised him not to construct the fortress; but 
that Cogeatar should not be made aware of their weakness, 
he ordered them to spread the report that all the differences 
that existed between them were because they were very 
angiy at his not giving up to them the ships in which they 
had a share. 



152 


COMMKNTASiES Of 


CHAPTER XLI. 

How the captaiiiB made another remonstrance to the great Afonso Dalbo- 
queiqae« and all signed it ; and what he did thereupon, and what 
else passed with him. 

The captains^ upon intelligence that the great Afonso 
Dalboquerqne had destroyed their remonstrance, in a few 
days' time, when he was in the principal tower, giving orders 
about some things* necessaiy for the work, sent to him by 
Antonio Fernandes, scrivener of the ship commanded by 
Francisco de Tavora, another remonstrance, signed by all 
except JoAo da Nova, who refused to sign. Afonso Dalbo- 
querque, being angry with them and their conduct, took the 
remonstrance folded up, just as it was given to him, without 
reading it, and ordered it to be placed beneath a stone of the 
doorway of the tower, which was just then being laid, which 
the mariners ever afterwards named the doorway of the 
remonstrances"; and the captains became so angry at this 
that from henceforth they laboured continually to find means 
to fall out with him ; and all they talked about when they met 
together, was how to injure the progress of afiairs at Ormuz, 
and they said that he was a traitor, and was constructing 
the fortress to elevate himself by its means, and make 
himself lord of the kingdom, and that it was all their own 
fault, since they had agreed that the fortress should be 
built, though it was very injurious to the king's interest, 
and that in the letter he had written to the viceroy (and of 
this Antonio do Campo was a true witness), he had sent 
word relating all sorts of evil stories about them, depriving 
them of their honourable character and services; and in 
these conversations they used to reprove Jofto da Nova, 
asking him why he did not go off to India, as he was not 
under any obligation to remain. And, not content with 
these consultations which they held among themselves. 



AFONSO DALfiOQUSBQUE. 


153 


each one of them in his own particular ship persuaded the 
seamen to take hiis part against Afonso Dalhoquerque^ 
affirming to them that he had robbed them of their share in 
the twenty thousand xerajinit paid by way of tribute by the 
king; and that the king, D. Manoel^ had given him written 
instructions in his orders, that of the first tribute which the 
conquered kings might pay, he was to give a share to every 
man in the fieet^ but he had seized upon all of it for himselfj 
in order to rise up in rebellion with the fortress as soon as 
it was completed, for he never intended to go back again 
to Portugal. When Afonso Dalboquerqne became aware of 
these coundls and consultations, by means of which the 
captains were labouring to procure all the men to rebel 
against him, and found that it was not sufficient to rouse 
their spirit for the business, to have told them frequently 
how well it would be to see in the windows of that fortress 
many ladies and bands of music, and to think of the great 
pleasure the king, D. Manoel, would experience when he 
knew that they had obtained possession of the kingdom of 
Ormuz, and built a fortress in it, thinking by these means 
he would excite in them a pleasure at the idea of helping 
them, — and because the chief reason at which they were 
dissatisfied with him was the letter which he hod written to 
the viceroy, he ordered them to be sent for, and showed it 
to them, telling them they might see by it that it was not 
true what Antonio do Gampo had told them, and he made 
to them many other justifying statements and explanations, 
as far as he could apologise, but they would receive none of 
them ; but rather, like proud and overbearing men, gave him 
to understand in as many words, that that was not the letter, 
but he had written another. And thqr were so indignant 
at what Antonio do Gampo had said of the letter, though it 
was not true, that Afonso Dalboquerqne tore it up befora 
them, and told them to write another of their own choice, 
and he would sign it ; and so he parted from them, very 



154 


ooianpMTABiiis ov 


much displeased at their refusing to accept his real excul- 
patory statements ; and the principal in all this affiiir was 
Jorge Barretoj whom the others had already drawn quite 
over to thsir side. When Afonso Dalboquerque was de- 
parted^ they ordered Jofto Lopezj servant to Francisco de 
Tavora, to collect the pieora of the letter; andj although 
nothing more was written in it than an account to the 
viceroy of the then state of affiurs at Ormuz, and how he 
had determined to maintain authority there^ with a request 
that meuj arms^ and artillery might be sent him^ they, 
perceiving this determination of Afonso Dalboquerque, 
agreed, as the matter was very important, not to go to 
India for three years, and to give up loading their holds, 
as they had arranged, and from thenceforth to plot all the 
more mischief against him. 


CHAPTER XLII. 

Of wbat the great Afonso Dalboqueique did with the masters, pilots, 
and all the other seamen whom the captains had incited to mutiny 
against him. 

Now that the great Afonso Dalboquerque was aware that 
theoaptains had incited to mutiny all the men in their ships, 
principally masters, pilots, mariners, and gunners, who were 
the people of whom he made the most account, for they 
were always the best in the work upon the fortress, in order 
to remove all disaffection from them, he ordered all of them 
to be summoned, and showed them the instructions he carried 
from the king, D. Manoel, and told them that it had come 
to his knowledge how the captains incited them to anger 
against him, by saying that he had robbed them of their 
shares in the fifteen thousand^ zerajina, paid as tribute by 
the King of Ormuz, and that by these instructions, as he 
demonstrated to them, they might see what the king’s 
' Twenty Ihoasnnd, p. 15S. 




AFONSO DAiaOQUERQUB. 


155 


pleasure was in this niatterj and he was not the man to 
appropriate anything except what belonged to himself^ but 
that^ on the contrary, he was willing to deposit as much as 
their claims would amount to with two responsible men, 
until the viceroy should decide the issue of the affair. But 
as they had been incited to mutiny by their captains, they 
would not accept any of his proposals, and began with loud 
voices and great tumult to cry out that they would not 
labour at the works, nor yet fight, as long as he refused to 
pay them their dues. 

Afonso Dalboquerque replied to them very quietly, telling 
thena that he excused their insubordination, and they must re- 
member that they were Portuguese, and placed, in the midst of 
enemies, very far from their own countiy, and that it would 
not do to have among them any feeling except profound peace 
and amicable feeling, for Cogeatar was very thoroughly cog- 
nisant of everything that took place in the fleet> and that they 
must not put any confidence in what their captains had ad- 
vised them to do, for they were getting angry at the long war, 
and anxious to get to India, in order to fill up their cargoes ; 
that what was their rightful due he would not withhold from 
them ; that they ought to bear in mind how, contrary to the 
king’s instructions, he had given them permission to make, 
free booty in sB the towns be had captured, whereby they 
had obtained great spoils, and had become very rich, 
besides having been always well treated by him, and having 
had their wages paid without any arrears ; that if they felt 
galled at the labour the war involved them in, he himself was 
not exempt from this, yet he had done nothing herein beyond 
complying with the orders contained in the king’s instruc- 
tions ; and that he desired them earnestly that they on their 
part would be willing so to serve him, as he had expected 
of them, and not by their fault mih so great an enterprise as 
that they were now engaged upon, for this was the object 
for which they had set out from Poi*tugal. Nevertheless, in* 



156 


COMMENTARIES OF 


spite of all these considerations^ and more too^ which Afonso 
Dalboquerque mentioned^ they began to urge^ without 
paying any attention to the matter in hand^ that as there 
was no doubt that their share would be given to them, if 
justice were rendered, they would be content that Jorge 
Barreto, Afonso Lopen da Costa, and Antonio do Campo 
should decide the matter. To this Afonso Dalboquerque 
replied that the contents of his instructions having been 
determined upon and arranged by the king, his master, he 
was not going to lay them open to the decision of any one, 
but rather to perform them, according to the orders con- 
tained in the same, and it would be quite sufficient for hem 
to have seen them to become convinced; but if, on the 
ether hand, they fancied they were right in what they said,, 
the viceroy was at hand to settle the matter, and he would 
be his own advocate before him; for he also, of all the 
money not due to the king, had his portion, and twenty-five 
shares. And now, being put out of temper, he took hold of 
a book in his hand, and said to them that he would swear by 
those holy gospels that he interpreted the commission in no 
other manner, neither had the king ordered that he should 
give a share of the tribute, paid by the kings they might 
conquer, to the men of the fleet. 

Hereat all replied that he must give them their shares, 
and each captain should be responsible for his own men 
to return the shares to him if it was decided in his favour. 
Afonso Dalboquerque, being desirous to be more cor- 
rectly informed who the captains were who had stirred 
up their men to this, temporised with them, and said he 
was quite willing to do what they asked him upon those 
conditions, provided also that each one brought a warrant 
signed by his captain, wherein he bound himself to this, 
and he would order the money to be paid at once. With 
this reply they departed, well pleased, to their own ships, 
and related to their captains all that had passed ; but they 



AFONSO DALBOQUBBQUE. 


167 


could never succeed in getting from them the necessary 
warrant, and so the matter- stood for the decision of the 
viceroy. This debate which Afonso Dalboquerque had had 
with the masters and pilots, being now brought to a close, 
ho sent word to Francisco de Tavora to get ready to proceed 
to the quarry, for there was a lack of stone at the works, 
and it was his turn that day, and to come on the morrow to 
arrange with him to go thither in company ; and as they 
had all sworn not to obey him, Francisco de Tavora went 
on in the morning without waiting for him, and Afonso 
Dalboquerque arrived a few hours later much annoyed, and, 
without saying a word to him, both walked up and down 
the beach while the boats took in their load. And while 
this was proceeding, Pero Yaz Dorta, the factor, arrived on 
horseback, coming from the city, and withdrew behind a 
rock to converse with Afonso Dalboquerque ; and after they 
had conversed, on returning to the boats, he perceived 
Francisco de Tavora some distance off on the sea, steering 
for the city, so he ordered him to be signalled to stop, but 
he would not ; and when he noticed this, he went on board, 
and went after him, and ordered a second signal to stop to 
be made to him, whereupon Francisco de Tavora, more out 
of shame than will, bade his men rest on their oars and watt. 


OHAPTEB XLIII. 

Of what the great Afonso Dalboquerque did with Francisco de Tavora 
on leaving the quarry, and of the convenation he hdd with the 
captains alter coming to land. 

As soon as the great Afonso Dalboquerque came up with 
Francisco de Tavora, as he understood how the seed pros- 
pered which Antonio do Campo had sown in the hearts of 
all the captains, he could not restrain himself from coming 
to an explanation with him, so he said : '' Sir Francisco 




158 


COMMENTARIES OF 


do Tavoru, I recommend you more courtesy when you next 
come with me than yon have to-day shown me. How ? 
Must you leave me between two rocks in the land of the 
enemy^ and go away alone, and without my permission ? I 
know well what punishment it is that yon deserve, but I put 
up with it all because I must needs do so.^^ Francisco de 
Tavora stood up on his feet, and, giving vent to oaths, 
said : You shall not punish me, nor have you power to 
do so. Take your own vessel, and do as you like with it, 
for I promise you that if we set sail, I shall escape from 
you.” And more words of this nature he said, to which 
Afonso Dalboqnerque would not reply, but ordered him to 
return to his own vessel; and being mercifully inclined 
towards him, he told him he was a poor man, and lately 
married, and ought not to consent to enter into conspira- 
cies with the other captains, for he would ruin himself with 
the king, D. Manoel. Francisco de Tavora, in a fume, 
told him he was richer than he himself, and wanted nothing 
from the king ; that he was well aware that he- wished him 
ill, because of the remonstrance that he had made; and 
that he would quit Ormuz and make his own way to the 
Cape of Guardafum, to perform the instructions contained 
in the king^s order. Afonso Dalboqnerque replied that he 
was much surprised at his saying that he wished him ill, 
because of the remonstrance made by them all, since he 
himself had announced to him that they were about to 
make it, and he had- asked him if he would sign it, and he 
had replied, smiling, and without any emotion, that if what 
the other captains did ^pleased him, he would sign it. 
Frandsco de Tavora, being ashamed at what was now re- 
torted upon him, held his tongue, and made no reply ; and, 
being now come to the shore, Afonso Dalboqnerque took 
him with him on board his own vessel. 

And because the captains were now thoroughly corrupted, 
and these proceedings were now for some time past well 



AFONSO DALllOQUEKQUE. 


159 


known throughout the whole city« and could no longer bo 
remedied except by the sword of the king’s justice, or by 
the patience of Job^ he made up his mind to take some 
measures with them. So he summoned them to come be- 
fore him^ and told them that when the king, D. Manoel, 
had graciously appointed them to be Captains of these ships, 
it was to the end that they should come and serve him in 
the enterprise at Ormuz in his company and fight under 
his flag, not to go fostering difierences, as they were now 
doing with him, which indeed were very prejudicial to the 
interests of the king, as the King of Ormuz and Cogeatar 
knew full well ; yet, from the moment of setting out from 
Qocotora until that very moment they had never given 
advice upon any subject but such as was opposed to the in- 
terests and honour of his highness, which he, for his part, 
had cared for with great judgment and much patience, 
which he had ever used towards them. And for all that 
the king had ordered him to take their advice, as they 
alleged, it was in his belief, that they, being what they 
appeared to be (that is, subordinate), would recommend 
him to do what seemed most to his interest, whereas they 
had counselled him to abandon so great an enterprise as 
the one they had in hand, and go frolicking about after 
prizes at the Cape of Guardafnm, when, if they all had helped 
him like true Portuguese, he would have put the enterprise 
in the state in which it ought to be; but if, day after day, 
they meant to come after him with remonstrances, causing 
the people to be divided, and turning everything into con- 
fusion, as it now was (as Cogeatar well knew), he would not 
put up with it as he had hitherto done. He begged them, 
therefore, earnestly of their goodness to serve the king, all 
of them peaceably, for he would reward them, for their ser- 
vices, and not to advise Jofto da Nova to come to a rupture 
With him, or beg his permission to go to India ; for they 
were all cognisant of the fact that as long as the present 



160 


COMMENTARIES OF 


war continued it would not be to the king’s interest to 
grant such a permission ; and so they had themselFOS told 
him in a council he had held with them upon the very sub- 
ject at Calayate. And if they were put out at the trouble 
they underwent at the continuation of the work upon the 
fortress^ they could remain on board their ships and need 
not go to land, for he would hold them excused, for it was 
not so important but that he would be happier in letting it 
remain as it was, than in passing over all the rest they said 
and did eveiy day against him. And in addition he would 
order them, on the behalf of the King of Portugal, their 
master, that not one of them should venture to land again 
without his permission, because, as the Moors wore now 
disquieted at these events, if any misfortune arose, he 
would take care to know which captain had been there. 
This conversation being now over, as he was unwilling to 
hear any more of the feigned arguments that they continued 
to adduce, he dismissed them to their ships, and suspended 
Francisco de Tavora from the command of his vessel, be- 
cause he had told him he meant to fly ; and he appointed- 
Diniz Fernandes de Melo in his place. 


CHAPTER XLIV. 

How four ChriatiaiiB fled from our fleet, and related to Gogeatar the 
disagreements that existed between Afonso Dalboquerque and the 
captains ; and of the message he sent to him, and of the rest that 
ensued. 

Inasmuch as it was part of the plan laid down by Cogeatar 
to study at all times to obtain information of all Afonso 
Dalboquerque’s doings and intentions, he immediately 
became aware of the diflTerences that had arisen between him 
and the captains, as well as of the remonstrances they had 
made to him. And at this veiy juncture four men deserted 
from the fleet, by whom he was better informed of all that 




AFONSO DALBOQUEBQUE. 


161 


was goin^ on^ and that Afonso Dalboquerque had deter- 
mined^ on his return from .the straits (whither he was bent 
upon going), to establish himself in Ormuz, and break out 
into opposition with the aid of the fortress, as soon as it 
was completed, and that he was constructing it against the 
opinion of the captains, and without their adVice, because 
the king, D. Manuel, had not given him any instructions to 
build a fortress in Ormuz. Gogeatar^ having long repented 
of having granted a site for the fortress, became highly 
rejoiced at their making these assertions that the captains 
and men of the fleet were displeased at it, for it grieved his 
heart excessively to have Consented to it ; and their certifying 
him that Afonso Dalboquerque was minded to establish 
himself in Ormuz conduced in no small degree to his re- 
pentance, for, if this event were to come to pass, he would 
remain without any government, and Afonso Dalboquerque 
would be lord of the kingdom. Cogeatar, then, excited at 
the false news of this design on the part of Afonso Dalbo- 
querque, gave an account of the afiair to certain noble Moors 
who were admitted to his most intimate friendship, to gather 
from them what course ho ought to pursue in regard to it. 
And having talked it over with them, after two days he sent 
word by Pero Yaz Durta, the factor, to, Afonso Dalboquer- 
que, that the rulers of the land were coming to him every 
day with heavy complaints, asserting that the real reason 
why he was building that fortress was, that he might rise 
up in rebellion by its aid and destroy Ormuz ; and should it 
be so he would not permit another stone to be put upon it. 

Afonso Dalboquerque, enraged at this infamy, which the 
Portuguese had put upon him, replied that he was no cor- 
sair, neither had the king, D. Manuel, his master, sent him 
for any other object than to conquer that kingdom, which ’ 
he had gained, and that Portuguese who possessed any 
feeling of honour were not in the habit of acting treasonably 
towards their king; and that he must not judge by the evi- 

M 



162 


COMMRNTARTKS OF 


dence of four ranaways whom he had with him^ and who 
were equally traitors to their God in deserting his Holy 
Faith as to their king, and that to destroy Ormuz^ if he were 
so minded^ he had no need of anything more than the fleet 
he then had with him^ and that the fortress which he was 
bnilding was not to serve as a means to enable him to break 
the treaty, as the captains gave him to understand, but 
rather to guard and defend Ormuz as a possession of the 
king, his master. And for all that Cogeatar sent this mes- 
yet the work went forwards. The factor went on 
shore with this reply, and told Cogeatar all that Afonso 
Dalboquerque had said to him ; and, as he, from what he 
heard from the captains, was desirous of a rupture with 
Afonso Dalboquerque, he told the factor to tell him that the 
king desired to send Bexnordim to converse with him upon 
certain important matters before the captains, and that he 
must arrange some place for the meeting. Afonso Dalbo- 
querque sent back word that the best and safest place 
wherein they could meet was the fortress, and he would 
proceed thither and wait for Bexnordim that veiy afternoon. 
When the factor went with this reply, Afonso Dalboquer- 
que, with all the captains, proceeded to the fortress and re- 
mained there a long time, until the factor returned and told 
him that Bexnordim would not come, for Cogeatar had re- 
pented of the message he had sent him, and that he had 
better not rely upon this man’s words, for he noticed that he 
was so pleased at knowing of the dijBTerences that existed 
between him and the captains, that he would not fulfil any of 
his promised engragements ; for, in the conversation he had 
held with him, he had discovered that the message which 
the king purposed to send by Bexnordim was, that he 
should get up at once out of the port with his fleet and be 
gone. 

Afonso Dalboquerque was deeply incensed at the idea of 
this messiltge which the king had intended to send him ; for 



AFONSO DALSOQUERQUE. 163 

it was but a few days before, and when he was ready to pass 
on to the straits, that the king had sent him word by the 
very same Bexnordim not to go, for there was certain news 
that a great lord of the mainland, who was called the Mes- 
sard, was preparing himself with a large fleet to fall upon 
the city, and as it was ruined and without men, it would be 
an easy matter to take it, and if he took it he would become 
master of the whole kingdom. To this he had replied 
that, although his voyage to the strait was imperative, in- 
asmuch as the king, his master, had set it down in his in- 
structions, yet he would do as he was desired ; for, in the 
contract he had made with him in the king’s name, ho was 
bound to defend the kingdom as much as if it were his own 
possession. Now, as this message which the king was 
minded to forward to Afonso Dalboquerque was agreeable 
to the policy of the captains and to the remonstrances they 
had made, Afonso Dalboquerque clearly perceived that they 
were to blame for this disgraceful conduct of Cogeatar; 
and knowing this, he dissembled with them, and without 
saying anything to them, dismissed them to their own ships. 
He also sent word to Cogeatar through Caspar Rodriguez, 
the interpreter, that from out the fleet of the King of Por- 
tugal, his lord, there were fled four Christians, whom he 
had arrested for punishment for certain crimes by them 
committed, and he desired, as a favour, that he would order 
them to be delivered up to him. Cogeatar told Caspar 
Rodriguez that up to that moment he knew nothing what- 
ever of them, but he would send and search for them, and 
if he found them, he would deliver them up to him imme- 
diately. Now, for all that Afonso Dalboquerque knew that 
Cogeatar had the Christians with him, yet he temporised 
with him, intending to complete the principal tower as far 
as the first story, to which work he gave great impetus. 
Nevertheless, after some days had elapsed, and he saw that 
the Christians were not forthcoming, he sent word that he 

M 2 



161 


C0MH1SNTAR1KS OF 


especially begged they would send back his four men ; for, 
as he was the chief captain of that fleet, he was obliged to 
give an account with the delivery of it and of the men to 
the king, his master; and he (Cogeatar) must remember 
that but a few days ago the king and ho had taken an oath 
of implicit obedience to the King of Portugal, his master, 
and to thoroughly comply with the commands of him who 
represented his authority. Cogeatar replied that he need 
not distress himself, for* his men were on the farther side of 
the mainland, tied hand and foot, that he had sent them 
thither, and in five days^ time he would send them back 
to him. 


CHAPTER XLV. 

How the great Afonso Dalboqucrque, perceiving that Cogeatar would 
not deliver up the men, ordered the officers and men employed on 
the work, who were on shore, to be withdrawn, and of what else 
passed with the captains. 

When the five days had elapsed which Cogeatar had re- 
quired to send in search of the men, the great Afonso Dal- 
boquerque sent him word by Caspar Rodriguez that the 
time which he had sent to beg for instituting a Bearish for 
his men was now gone by some days, and if they had arrived, 
would he send them back to him. Cogeatar told him that 
he had sent some of his servants to the mainland in search 
of the Christians, and that they had not come back and 
had done nothing, but he might tell the chief captain that 
he must return him one of his servants whom he had taken 
in reprisal, a man who knew the country very well, that he 
might despatch him in search of the men ; for he was very 
diligent, and would set about this business in a different 
manner to anyone else, and then, in two days' time, he 
would send the fugitives back. Caspar Rodriguez re- 
turned from the land with this reply, and informed Afonso 



AFONSO DALBOQUBRQUE. 165 

Dalboquerque that he perceiTod from the overbearing mien 
of certain Moors who were of the faction of Cogeatar, and 
also by the wording of his reply, that he would not deliver 
up the Christians to him, but was desirous of a rupture 
with him, and was fostering this delay with the intention 
of putting into practice some kind of treason which he had 
organised, for he had given orders that the entrances of two 
streets, which led to the houses where the factory of stone 
and mortar was situated, should be closed. Afonso Dal- 
boquerque, being now advertised of this that Caspar Rod- 
riguez mentioned, and also to anticipate the malice of 
Gogeatar, determined to order a cessation of the work, and 
talked over the matter with Jo&o da Nova and the factor, 
who just then happened to be present with him in the parao 
close to the shore; and as they agreed in thinking it ad- 
visable, Afonso Dalboquerque, without further delay, issued 
orders to JoEo da Nova to withdraw all the officers of the 
work, as well as the rest of the men who were going about 
the city, lest they should receive some affront from the 
Moors. So JoSLo da Nova proceeded forthwith to land, and 
caused all of them to withdraw to the parao so effectually, 
that before sunset there was not one left in the city. 

When they were all withdrawn, Afonso Dalboquerque 
summoned the captains and certain fidalgos to his ship, 
and laid before the whole assembly what had passed with 
Cogeatar, and what Caspar Rodriguez had told him, and 
desired them to tell him what to do, if Cogeatar still refused 
to deliver up the fugitives. The ensuing discussion of 
the matter ended in their agreeing that in the event of 
Cogeatar not delivering up the men, he ought to declare 
war against him and destroy Ormuz, if he were able to do 
so ; and that he ought not to send back his Moor whom he 
had begged for, nor yet the others, as the king desired, 
for their whole conduct was a tissue of deceit and lies. But 
Afonso Lopez da Costa was of an opposite opinion, and 



166 


COMMENTABIES OF 


said that, in spite of what the captains had alleged, it would 
be as well to send him his Moor, and so get a positive proof 
of their lies and deceptions ; for it was always in his power 
to make war upon them whenever he liked. Afonso Dalbo- 
qnerque sided with Afonso Lopez da Costa^s idea, and sent 
to Cogeatar his servant, and granted him the days’ grace 
he desired ; and, in the meanwhile, he told the factor art- 
fully to withdraw the factory and the men in it. When 
Cogeatar knew of the orders to withdraw the factory, and 
saw how Afonso Dalboquerque was always beforehand with 
him, he sent him word by Alma9&, on the king’s behalf, 
begging him as a great favour not to order the factory to 
be withdrawn, for it would be a great scandal for the mer- 
chants, and he, on his part, would receive much annoyance 
thereby. Afonso Dalboquerque, in reply, asked how his 
royal highness could expect to have the confidence of the 
revenue of the king, his master, and his officers, if Cogeatar 
had ordered walls to be built across two streets which led 
to the factory, and refused to send him four vagabonds who 
had fied from his fleet, and for whom he had sent many 
times to seek ; and, with this reply, he ordered JoSLo Estfto 
to exhibit before him the documents they had ratified in his 
presence at the delivery of the kingdom, and to inform the 
king that he begged he would of his favour take great care 
in what he was about, and not fail from his word, nor de- 
sire to make war with the King of Portugal, his master, 
for it would be his ruin, but look well to those documents 
and the seals wherewith they were sealed, and not break 
the peace, which he had agreed upon with him in the name 
of the King of Portugal, for the kingdom of Ormte could 
not be defended by force of arms, but only by prudence and 
good counsel. The king and Cogeatar would not look at 
the documents, saying that they were quite aware of their 
contents, and intended to comply entirely with them ; for 
th^ were the subjects of the King of Portugal, and that 



AFONSO DALBOQUEBQUE. 


167 


they had taken all this trouble upon themselves out of 
charity towards the men who had deserted^ but that they 
need not be alarmed^ for they should bo produced. 


CHAPTER XLVI. 

How Gogeatar sent word to the great Afonso Dalboquerque, asking for 
a safe conduct for the Christians, and how the captains sent him a 
remonstrance urging him not to make war against the city, and 
what further took place with them thereupon. 

At the end of the two days which Cogeatar had required 
that he might send the Christians^ Afonso Dalboquerque^ 
who perceived they were not likely to come^ sent him word 
by Caspar Rodriguez^ that he desired him earnestly to re- 
turn his men^ and not make any further delay^ for he would 
not put up with it any longer. So Caspar Rodriguez went 
to land^ and delivered his messages to Cogeatar^ who^ after 
conversing with him for some time upon the subject^ bade 
him inform the chief captain that he must send back certain 
Moors who had been captured in the destruction of the 
vessels, as they were his servants, and a written deed 
promising not to bring the deserters to justice, and then 
he would send them back at once, for he was not desirous 
of making war upon him, but of maintaining peace and 
friendship ; for they were all vassals of the King of Por- 
tugal, and he would always continue in obedience to him ; 
and thereupon he added many other words to the end that 
his deceitfulness might take effect. Caspar Rodriguez re- 
turned with this reply, and told Afonso Dalboquerque that 
Cogeatar had caused the Christians to be exhibited to him, 
in very good trim, and to all appearance so well satisfied 
with themselves, that in spite of all the promises of Co- 
geatar, he would afiSrm that they would not be restored to 
him. For all that Afonso Dalboquerque was quite well 



168 


COMMENTARIES OF 


aware of his tricks and lies, ho continued to dissemble with 
him, for he was anxious to know from the fugitives who 
it was who had incited them to fly; and that nothing 
should remain untried, he sent Caspar Bodriguez back 
again with the written deed which had been demanded of 
him for security, and desired to be informed where they 
should land the Moors, for he would send them back to 
him without delay. 

As soon as Caspar Rodriguez had set out with this mes- 
sage, Afonso Dalboquerque ordered Jo3>o Estfto to make 
his way quickly to all the ships and collect the Moors, who 
numbered about two hundred, and having embarked them 
in a zamhuco, to bring them close to the shore, where he 
himself was in the parao ; and as soon as they were there, 
he sent word to Gogeatar, that he had the Moors there, and 
he might now forward the Christians. Gogeatar replied 
that he might put them on shore, and send a captain to tho 
jetty for the Christians because he would deliver them up 
there. Now, as Afonso Dalboquerque was on the alert 
with respect to this man^s treacherous conduct, he sent D. 
Antonio de Noronha, his nephew, and JoSLo da Nova, with 
two hundred men, to draw up the Moors in order close to 
the fortress, tied one to the other, there to await a message 
from him ; and he ordered Francisco de Tavora to proceed 
in a boat to the pier for the Christians, and Caspar Rod- 
riguez to go on in advance and tell Gogeatar that the Moors 
were on the land, and ho must send the Christians to Fran- 
cisco de Tavora, who had gone to the appointed place, to 
take them in charge. And, when Caspar Rodriguez had 
been a long while gone, without returning with a reply, 
Afonso Dalboquerque despatched one of his servants to find 
out the cause of his delay, and he met him there on the 
way back. He told him that Gogeatar had detained him 
all that time without an answer, but he could not discover 
the reason of his doing so, and that he had seen the fugi- 



AFONSO DALBOQUERQUE. IG9 

tives, clothod in the habit of the Moors, with their swords 
in their belts, very happy, like men who felt sure they 
would not be delivered up ; and after much wrangling with 
him, he had told him that he ought to send the Moors back 
as a present to the king, that the business might proceed 
on a more favourable footing, and he would bid the Chris- 
tians to be shown to Francisco de Tavora. Afonso Dalbo- 
querque, enraged by this reply, sent word immediately to 
D. Antonio and J 0 S .0 da Nova to put the Moors back again 
into the zamhucOy for Cogeatar would not deliver up the 
Christians, and upon the jetty there was a great collection 
of archers, and he would come to their support with the 
rest of the men, lest, if Cogeatar were plotting some 
treachery, he should fall upon us unexpectedly. 

When the Moors were all put on board the zamhuco, 
Afonso Dalboquerque disembarked, and joined D. Antonio 
and Jo3.o da Nova, and remained there a long time at the 
foot of the fortress, awaiting the decision of Cogeatar ; and 
when all was , quieted down, he returned with his men to 
the boats, and wont on board his own vessel. No sooner 
had he arrived, than Antonio Fernandez, who was tho 
bearer of the remonstrances (as I have before mentioned), 
put into his hands a written paper signed by all the cap- 
tains, to the following effect : — Sir, we do this in writing, 
because by word of mouth we dare not, as you always an- 
swer us so passionately ; and for all that you, sir, have fre- 
quently told us that the king gives you no orders to take 
counsel with us, yet this business is of so great an impor- 
tance, that we consider ourselves obliged to offer you our 
advice ; did we not do so, we should be worthy of punish- 
ment. Now, because this war, in which you are now 
desirous of engaging, is very much opposed to the interest 
of the king, our lord, we consider that your worship ought 
to weigh well, before entering upon it, how little Cogeatar 
is to blame for objecting to have against all reason to pay 



170 


COMMBNTABISS OF 


down in ready money fifteen thousand emzado^ of revenuo, 
eveiy year^ contrary to the honour of such a large city and 
kingdom ; yet, if notwithstanding all this, your worship is 
determined to prosecute the war, and break the peace and 
agreement which has been made with him, it is our opinion 
that you ought not to do so ; for it would be more to the 
service of the king, our lord, if we were now to quit this 
city and temporise with Gogeatar, and in the course of the 
year return in strength in order to subdue it and confirm 
our hold upon it, than to destroy it for ever. And if, in 
spite of idl we can say, your worship is bent upon entering 
into this war, see you that it be with all the circumspection 
and assurance that the fleet can command, in that it is more 
conducive to the interest of our said lord to obtain possession, 
and not to destroy the city now, since it can be destroyed 
at any time we please ; because, in case of your worship's 
landing in Ormuz or at the city, we are determined not to 
go with you, nor enter into such a war, nor such designs, 
and that this may be known for certain, and we be not able 
to deny it hereafter, we all sign our names here : this day, 
the fifth of the month of January, in the year fifteen hun- 
dred and eight. 

^^Jodo da Nova. 

Antonio do Gampo. 

Afonso Lopez da Oosta. 

Fra/ncisco de Tavora. 

Manuel Telez/* 

When Afonso Dalboquerque had perused this letter, he 
went on board Francisco de Tavora’s ship, taking with him 
Jofto Estfto, scrivener to the fleet, and there summoned them 
all to him ; and when they were assembled, he told them 
how Antonio Fernandez had handed him a writing signed 

^ The passage on p. 131, to which this refers, has the word xerafins; 
hence it would appear that the Portuguese eruMdo and the Persian 
xerqfim were equivalent. 



AFONBO DALBOQUEKQUE. 


171 


by tbem all, which he had put away very carefully to show 
to the kingj his lord; and since they had changed their 
mind from what they formerly advised him to do, and were 
now of opinion that it would not be well to destroy Ormuz, 
he desired them to tell him whether they would by word of 
mouth a£Srm the fact that they would not be with him in this 
war, as they in their writing had asserted; they ought, how- 
ever, to remember that it was but two days ago, when discuss- 
ing with him whether or not war should be made upon Or- 
muz, if Cogeatar would not deliver up the refugees, that they 
had counselled him to make war upon this man, and not rely 
any longer on his smooth and specious words, for they were, 
all false, yet now hie found them so altered, that he thought 
it must either be owing to their temper, or to something 
which he could not quite understand, for it was not the 
habit of cavaliers to shrink from the hardships of war, for 
the king, D. Manuel, with his usuai confidence in them, had 
sent them in his company to conquer, that kingdom, and 
they ought to consider very thoroughly what they said, for 
to refuse to obey him was to act in opposition to the king’s 
power, which had been entrusted to him over them. 

The captains’ reply was that they had in truth counselled 
him to enter into war with Ormuz, in case that Cogeatar 
should not deliver up the deserters ; yet after having told 
him so, they had taken thought in the matter, and come to 
the conclusion that it was veiy much to the interest of the 
king, our master, not to do so, and therefore he ought to put 
it off as long as he could, and temporise with Cogeatar, for 
the king, D. Manuel, had stated in the instructions he had 
pven him, that all he did was to be upon their recommenda- 
tion, which he, on his part, never would accept, but would 
keep acting as he chose, without giving them any account of 
it, and that it was on this account that each of them was 
mentioning the aggravations they had received from him. 
Afonso Dalboquerque, in answer to them, said they could 



172 


COMMENTARIES OF 


not call troubles^ brought about by war, aggravations, and 
even if they were, then was not the season to mention thetn, 
but rather they ought to finish the fortress and defend it, 
in spite of the Moors. And if the aggravations they men- 
tioned were from his conduct, they had the viceroy in 
India, who would do them justice, and the king, D. Manuel, 
in Portugal, who would punish him ; but, just then, what 
was far more to the interest of the king was, whether they 
would be with him in the war or not. Then Francisco de 
Tavora cried out thaj; he would be with him, and do all he 
desired him to do ; but the remaining captains declared they 
would do nothing else but what they had put down in their 
writing. Jo9.o da Nova began to say that the reason the 
captains had come to that determination was because he had 
sent to withdraw the men from the city without their advice ; 
and that since Gogeatar had admitted that they were all 
vassals of the King of Portugal, the pretext on which to 
found a war was taken away. Afonso Dalboquerque replied 
to him : This is what you ought to have said to me when 
I sent you to collect the men, and not now, for I did it with 
your counsel and that of the factor.’* And without caring to 
hear any more from them, he dismissed them. 

As soon as Afonso Lopes da Costa arrived on board bis 
own ship, he summoned all his men together, and sought 
to hear from them if they remained in their original de- 
termination. All replied that they would die wherever their 
chief captain died. The colloquy over, Afonso Dalboquerque 
returned to his own ship, much annoyed at this obstinacy 
of the captains ; and while he was thus in suspense, not 
knowing what course to take, Fem&o Soares arrived and 
told him that the captains were veiy sorry on account of 
the writing they had sent him, and much more so at the 
words that had passed with him, and begged him very 
earnestly to do them the favour to forget it all, for their 
passion had blinded them, and all were ready to serve him 
in the war, and perform all that he might require of them. 



AFONSO DALBOQUKllQUE. 


173 


CHAPTER XLVII. 

How the great Afonso Dalboquerque determined to make war with 
Ormuz ; and how the king’s people, who were on guard at the 
watering stations of Turuinbaque, were routed by ours. 

As the great Afonso Dalboquerque had made up bis 
mind to make war against the King of Ormuz^ unless the 
fugitive Christians were delivered up, he desired, before 
commencing hostilities, to understand thoroughly the in- 
subordination shown by the captains, and know whether 
the message they had sent him through FernSU> Soares was 
real or merely complimentary ; for if they were unwilling 
to remain in obedience to him, as they had asserted, he 
would provide other captains for the ships who would serve 
the king. He sent, therefore, JoSLo EstHo, the scrivener to 
the fleet, to say on his behalf to Antonio do Campo, that 
he had certain charges to make against him, and he must 
resign his post as captain, and be taken into custody on 
board the flagship, and to say to the other captains, that 
since they were determined not to serve the king in the 
war, they must resign the command of their ships, and he 
would provide them with captains who would serve the 
king, and abide in obedience to him ; and he told him also 
to make a legal statement of all that had passed with them. 

When the captains perceived this determination of Afonso 
Dalboquerque, being ashamed of what they had entered 
upon, they told Jofto Estfto that they were very sorry' for 
what they had said and done, and that they had sent to tell 
the chief captain this by Femfto Soares, and that they were 
prepared to serve him and be with him in this war he desired 
to enter upon. As Afonso Dalboquerqne was now sure of 
the repentance of the captains, and as it was not the season 
now to punish their guilt, owing to the great need he had 
of them, he forgave them, and restored to them their captain- 



174 


COIIMBNTARIES OF 


ships^ with the exception of Antonio do Campo, whom he 
would not reinstate, as he was informed that he had been 
the ringleader of all these disturbances. 

And, at the close of these conversations held with the 
captains, he desired them to approach the shore as closely 
as they could in their ships, and put out warps from their 
stems that they might turn back whenever they wished, 
and with their artillery direct the fire in batteries against 
the king’s fortress, and each one was to have alongside his 
ship a pcurao to screen them from the artilleiy which the 
Moors had on the fortress wall ; he also ordered his master 
to bring his own ship as close as he could into shore on 
the side of the western harbour. The captains that day 
battered the city so furiously, that they killed many men 
in the fortress, and overthrew many houses throughout the 
city ; while the Moors had their artillery trained so high, 
that at low tide it could not do any injury to the ships, 
for it passed over their head, and at high tide it struck 
the paraos with which they had screened themselves ; and 
if they sunk any of these each captain would put another 
at once in its place. 

Antonio do Campo, being ashamed at seeing the captains 
in their own ships fighting, and himself away from his, sent 
begging Afonso Dalboquerque to pardon his past errors and 
to restore him to his ship, that he might assist his com- 
rades with it, and he would do all required of him. Now, 
at that very juncture there was a great lack of men, so that 
for all that Antonio do Campo had been the one who plotted 
these disturbances, he forgave him, and ordered the ship to 
be delivered up to him again ; and he told the captains to 
go on with the attack upon the fortress upon the following 
day, which they did with such fury that the carriages of 
the larger guns, being all rotten, were split to pieces. When 
Afonso Dalboquerqne knew of this, he ordered the ships to 
withdraw towards the sea, and ranged himself in order to 



AFONSO DALBOQUEBQUE. 


175 


prevent any supplies or water from entering the city^ and 
surrounded the island in a circle with all the fleet, and 
ordered all the ships which were in the harbour under his 
safe pass to bo burned, first of all requiring Gogeatar many 
times to surrender the deserters he had kept from him, and 
to bear in mind the agreement which he and the king had 
made when he delivered over to him the government of that 
kingdom in the name of the King of Portugal. And, owing 
to the blockade all round, there began to be in the city 
great want of supplies and of water, for these could not be 
procured from the mainland; and Afonso Dalboquerque 
knowing how short they were of provisions, ordered the 
circuit of blockade to be drawn in closer, and signified to 
the captains and all the men in the fleet that it was his 
determination not to raise the blockade until the king 
should deliver the city to him, and that ho* was no longer 
minded to proceed to the straits. Having agreed to this, 
he ordered Manuel Telez to make himself ready to trans- 
port the spoils they had collected to the fortress of Qocotord ; 
and on receipt of news on the way that any ships from Por- 
tugal were cruising along that coast, he was to visit the 
captains and order them, on the part of Afonso Dalboquer- 
que, to proceed to his assistance, and he was also to bring 
back all the munitions of war he could find, for he had 
great need of them all. 

When the people of the city saw that they were so sur- 
rounded, that from no direction could water be brought, 
which was what they felt most of all, the principal Moors 
collected together and went to the king, desiring him 
earnestly to provide a guard for the pools of Turumbaque, 
which were at the head of the island, lest the Portuguese 
should obtain possession of them, and from these the great 
lack of water could be supplied. The king immediately 
sent a captain, with men on horse and on foot, to remain on 
guard at the pools, and tents in which they could encamp. 



176 


COMMENTARIES OF 


When Afonso Dalboqnerqne was informed of this plan of 
the enemy, he sent by night a reconnoitring party; and 
having received intelligence of the order in which' they 
were disposed, without any delay, he despatched D. Anto- 
nio do ISToronha with one hundred men, and Francisco do 
Tavora and JoSLo da Nova with another hundred men, to 
attack them. These, when they were ready, went on board 
their boats and set out at nightfall ; and on their arrival at 
the pools about two hours before daybreak, they imme- 
diately fell upon the, Moors, who wore thrown into confusion 
by the suddenness of the attack, and routed them, killing 
two of the king^s principal captains, who had come with 
that guard, and many Moors, both infantry and cavalry ; 
and they burned a few houses which stood there, and all 
the tents which they had taken thither for their accommo- 
dation. And when this was done they filled the pools with 
dead bodies of men, and horses, and camels, and betook 
themselves to their boats with this victoiy, and so returned 
to the ships, carrying with them two archers whom they 
there captured. 

From these men Afonso Dalboquerque learned that some 
days ago the king, by the advice of the blind king and of 
the governors of the land, had made up his mind to rebel 
against him, and put to death all the Portuguese who were 
about in the city ; for he was very sorry that he had ever 
granted them a place in which to construct the fortress; 
and that there was a great lack of water in the city, 
end Cogeatar, as he could not put confidence in anyone, 
kept the key of a cistern which would contain about 
eighty cubits,^ and had a captain and company on guard 
over it. 

^ CovadAB^ a measure used in Portugal, 'which contains three-quarters 
of a yard, or a Flemish ell. — VUyra, Bluteau says that the eovado cor- 
responds to the lesser Roman cubit of one and a half feet, or three 
palmo9 eraveyros^ or standard palms, of which five go to the t^ara, or ell 
of three and one-third Portuguese feet. 



AVON80 DALBOQUBBQUB. 


177 


Aliihough/the Moors who were on guard over the cistern 
were sure of support, as they were so near to the city, 
Afonso Dalboquerque, nevertheless, in order to disquiet 
them, made up his mind to attack them, and got himself 
ready with all his people, and set oat from the ships before 
daybreak, and ordered Francisco de Tavora in the vanguard 
with forty men to attack, while he, with all the rest of the 
men, followed in reserve ; and they fell upon the Moors so 
suddenly, that they put them at once to flight, and followed 
afber them awhile, killing many Moors on foot, as well as 
their captain, who was on horseback; and Lopo Alvarez, who 
was the constable's servant, was the flrst who struck him 
with a lance. Many of our men were wounded with arrows, 
for the Moors on their horses fled away, and as they fled kept 
on shooting arrows against us, as we followed them in dis- 
order. So Afonso Dalboquerque, being fearful lest a large 
force should sally out to succour them, ordered D. Antonio 
de Noronha to withdraw the men from the pursuit, and 
broke the gates of the cistern, and fllled it full of corpses 
and dead horses, and w;ith this victory returned to embark 
on board the boats, and made his way to the ships. 


OHAPTBB XLVm. 

How Cogeatar again ordered hia people to <dear out the poolaof Turum- 
baque, and how the people whom he had appointed to guard them 
were discomfited by our men, and of farther matters. 

Two days had now elapsed since this skirmish, and there 
began to be a great want of water in the city, so that many 
children began to die of thirst, and they could provide 
themselves from no other quarter with dispatch, except 
firom the wells of Turumbaque, because of the exceeding 
vigilance and care which the great Afonso Dalboquerque 
hftd employed in blockading the island. So Cogeatar de- 

N 



178 


COXMIHTAUBS OF 


termined to send secretly and clear oat the pools; and with 
this view he dispatched a captain with some men on foot 
and on horse^ and many camds and beasts to bring water 
immediately to the city. Now^ as Afonso Dalboqnerqne 
had his sources of information respecting all the intentions 
of the king^ to wit^ Moors to whom he used to give many 
presents from his stocky he was immediately advised of 
this, and prepared Mannel Telez and Afonso Lopez da 
Costa, with one hundred and fifty men, to go and fall upon 
these men and cover up the wells again. The captains 
started at nightfall by sea, and arrived at the wells when 
morning was just breaking, and at once attacked the Moors; 
and, as these were not in careful array, thq^ were routed, 
and, without making any resistance, took to flight, and our 
men pursued them, and killed many as they came up with 
them, and then returned in a body to the wells, and killed 
all the camds and beasts of burden which the Moors had 
there to carry water, and covered up the wells. When this 
was done th^ returned to the boats, and, betaking them- 
sdves to the ships, came upon Afonso Dalboqnerqne on his 
way towards them in boats to give them assistance, if it 
were necessary. 

The captains recounted all that had taken place, and he 
praised their deed greatly, and the manner in which they 
had attacked the Moors. And he told them that he had 
been informed that opposite the wells there was a rising 
ground running down in a point towards the sea;, whereon 
a fort might be built, which would hold both artOleiy and 
men, to oppose the enemy when carrying water thence to 
the city, and it would be well to survey the site, and see 
what could be done with it; for, if they could cut off that 
supply of water, the king would have of necessity to yield, 
for there were no means of provision, except with great 
trouble and risk of lives. Having come to tliia determina- 
tion, they all returned, and proceeded to disembark in the 



AFONSO DALBOQUSBQUB. 


179 


harbour^ and when they were about to mount the hill^ they 
perceived mounted men coming from the city to succour a 
few archers who remained there after the late skirmish. 
Afonso Dalboquerque^ as soon as he saw them, remained 
quiet with all his men^ and ordered Afonso Lopez da Costa, 
D. Antonio de Noronha, Manuel Telez, and Jorge Barreto, 
to take up a front position among our men, and keep them 
back ; and when they were all compactly united, he ordered 
D. Antonio, with one hundred men, to ascend the hill and 
attack the Moors ; and he himself remained where he was 
on the beach, with the rest of the men, in sight of them. 

D. Antonio achieved the ascent so valoronsly, that he 
fell upon the archers before the mounted men could get up, 
and, having put them to flight, pursued them along a valley 
which led to the mountains. The horsemen who had come 
out of the dtj, seeing our men disorganised in pursuit, be- 
gan to attack them, and the archers, when they found them- 
selves supported by the mounted men, fiioed about, and, 
joining their forces, attacked D. Antonio. As soon as 
Afonso Dalboquerque saw our men hard put to it with the 
horsemen, he sent orders to D. Antonio to return to the 
place where he himsdf was; and, as it was getting late, 
he commanded him, through Afonso Lopez da Costa, to 
retire at once, and with this dedsiva message he proceeded 
to withdraw down the course of the valley, in quick march- 
ing order. YPlien the Moors perceived that D. Antonio 
was withdrawing his forces, they drew nearer to him; and 
D. Antonio, as soon as he found himself pressed in by the 
Moors^ faced about and made them turn bade, some archerB 
being left stretohed along the ground dead; and he thus 
returned to the beadi where his unde was stationed, the 
Moors following dose upon him without any order, and 
killing a youth dose beside Afonso Dalboquerque with an 
arrow-wound in the head. IMlboquerqne, however, noticing 
that the Moors came on in disorder, commanded D. Anto- 

v2 



180 


COKUNTARIKS OF 


nio to fiJl upon them again with his people, and in this 
charge they killed three mounted Moors, who desired to 
outstrip the others, men well furnished with dothing and 

ftrudSa 

When the mounted men saw these were killed^ they 
threw away their arms and the trappings of their horses 
to make less weight, and fled away towards the city. There 
were wounded in this skirmish D; Antonio (with seron 
arrows), Gongalo Queimado, Nano Vaz de Castelo-branco, 
and Antonio de Liz, and others ; and they withdrew again. 
The archers, although they saw themselves deserted by the 
mounted men, rallied at the mouth of the vidley with the 
intention of avenging themselves, and began to harass our 
party with flights of arrows, until Afonso Dalboquerqne, 
annoyed at their importunity, told the captains to fall upon 
them, and they pursued them all along the valley upwards, 
and punished them so severely, that they no longer dared 
to attack us, but collected themselves together on a hill. 
And in this charge Afonso Lopez da Costa, Manuel Telez, 
Jorge da Silveira, Femfto Feijo, and Jofto Rodriguez Pereira, 
were wounded. As he had now driven off the Moors from 
his party, Afonso Dalboquerqne withdrew to the boats, and 
proceeded to the ships, without coming to any determina- 
tion respecting the place which he had started to survey ; 
and from two archers who were captured there he learned 
that one of the three horsemen whom they had killed was 
the son of Rexnordim, a very gallant man, who had come 
from Persia with an army to serve the king in this war, and 
for him they made so great an outcry in the city, that they 
could be heard in the ships. These three captains who were 
killed there paid dearly for Ihe pride they had evinced in 
offering the king to protect the wells. 



AFONSO DALSOQUERQUB. 


181 


CHAPTER XLIX. 

Of the mesBage sent by the king to the great Afonso Dalboquerque, 
begging for peac^ and the answer he gave, and what pass^ in the 
Island of Queixome on proceeding thither for water. 

As soon as the great Afonso Dalboquerqae had with- 
drawn to the ships, on obtaining this victory, it was an- 
nounced to him that, after his departure to Tnrumbaque, 
two almadias had gone out by night to the mainland. Now, 
because he was desirous of knowing the whole reason of 
this trip, he ordered Duarte de Sousa, with two skiffs well 
furnished for any contingency, to go at once and wait for 
them at that part whence they had set out; and, as the 
almadias returned at night, they c»me unexpectedly upon 
Duarte de Sousa, who, directly that he caught sight of them, 
gave them chase, and before they touched land took them 
both, and proceeded with them to Afonso Dalboquerque. 
And from the Moors who were csaptnred, he heard that Go- 
geatar, in consequence of the great lack of water in the city, 
sent swift-rowing almadias to Naband^ for it by night; for 
these (K)nld coast along more secretly than the paraos. 
When the Moors had told him of thii^ he ordered their 
noses and ears to be cut off, and that they should be put 
on shore, and their almadias burned; and from thenceforth 
he ordered a watch to be set upon the shore to put a stop to 
this device by which Cogeatar designed to get water. When 
the people of the city perceived this means of supply cot ofl^ 
and that they wqre in great likelihood of perishing with 
hunger and thirst, many men assembled together, with 
their women and children, although it was night, and snr- 
ronnded the king^s palace, shouting loudly, and cnying out, 
desiring him to take pity upon them and the troubles they 
were suffering in the death of their fathers, husbands, chil- 
dren, and relations, without any hope of aid coming to them 



182 


COMMENTARIES OF 


from any qnarter^ and all because Cogeatar would not give 
up four Christians^ who were worth nothings and of whom 
they had no need. And further^ they related many disasters 
which had taken place^ so that it was grievous to hear 
them, and the cries were so loud that they were heard in 
the ships. 

When the king perceived the troubles of his people^ and 
the great need in which the city was placed, he concluded, 
with the advice of the blind king, to send and beg for mercy 
from the great Afonso Dalboquerque, and sent him word 
by Almaq&, a very confidential eunuch, that he was sorry 
for all that had taken place, and would swear to him, by 
his law, that the blame was none of his, and begged him 
earnestly to be graciously content with the destruction 
he had already done in the city, and he would do all that 
was desired of him. Afonso Dalboquerque replied, that 
if the king was desirous of making terms and peace with 
him, he ought first of all to order a surrender of the fortress 
of the King of Portugal, his master, and his men whom he 
had seized, and all the goods that remained in the factory, 
and to pay all the expenses incurred ; and when all this had 
been satisfactorily settled, they Cbuld then deliberate in con- 
cert, for under any other consideration he would have no 
communications with him. So Alma^a returned with this 
reply to land, and the king, upon taking counsel upon the 
affair with the blind king and Cogeatar, and with the prin- 
cipal Moors of his government, answered that it was no use 
talking about the fortress, for he would not give it up, but 
he would give him as much money as he wished. Afonso 
Dalboquerque, on receipt of so haughty a reply, perceiving 
that it was due to the infinence of Cogeatar, told Almafi 
to inform the king that he had no need of money, nor de- 
sired anything further of him except the fortress, which 
belonged to the King of Portugal, gained with his men and 
fleet, and if he would not give it up to him, there was no 



AFONSO DALBOQUBBQUN. 


183 


use in speaking of any agreement ; but he hoped that Co- 
geatar, who had caused him to send that reply^ would some 
time or other repent of having advised him to do sa 

Now, as Gogeatar knew that the captains were of opinion 
that war ought not to be made upon the king^ he sent im- 
mediately by night to tell them at the shipsj where they 
were close on shore, that he would have them to understand 
that the king had paid many compliments to their chief 
captain, and had offered him much money not to destroy 
their city, which was in obedience to the King of Portugal, 
even as they were all of them his vassals, but he would not 
accept it, and that therefore the king was minded to 
forward a ship with a message to the Viceroy of India, 
giving him an account of this unreasonable conduct towards 
him. Afonso Dalbocjuerque was immediately informed of 
this, that Gogeatar had communicated by sight with the 
captains } but he dissembled with them, without punishing 
them as they deserved, until he could learn their further 
intentions, and went on with the war as before. And 
because ihe fleet was very much in want of water, he sent 
Antonio do Gampo and Pero Vaz Dorta, the factor, to the 
port of Nabandd, to try whether by presents or money they 
could obtain any water, for tibe inhabitants of that harbour 
live by it, and carry it to Ormuz for sale. When they 
arrived there they found a captain of the King of Ormuz, 
with a company of men on guard over that port, who would 
have nothing to say to our party, nor permit the people to 
sell water to them for money. And Antonio do Gampo, 
perceiving the determination of the captain, returned to the 
ships and related to Afonso Dalboquerqne what had taken 
place, and he made ready at once to go in person to the 
Isle of Queizome, to obtain water by force,, for this was 
the nearest point ; and he took with him Antonio do Gampo 
and Francisco de Tavora, with one hundred men, and poraos, 
and Moors who were accustomed to the business of carrying 



184 


COMMENTARIES OF 


water to the dtj, and left Jofto da Nova, with all the rest 
of the men^ in charge of the ships daring his absence. 

When all was prepared, they set ont at night, and reached 
the island before dawn. And before they disembarked^ 
Afonso Dalboqnerque ordered them to station sentries 
around the walla to keep a good look out over all the land 
afar off, and he bade Duarte de Sousa and the factor to take 
care and get the paraos loaded with water as rapidly as they 
could. When all this was set in order^ he disembarked with 
all the party, and marched direct towards a place which was 
called Arb^s^ which was at some little distance from the 
seashore^ and he ordered Jorge Barreto^ with ten men, to 
ascend a lofty knoll^ and keep watch over the land^ while 
Antonio do Campo, with fifty men, went forward and 
attacked the place. As soon as Antonio do Campo arrived 
he made the assault without delay, and Afonso Dalboquerque, 
who was following up behind him, did the same in another 
direction in company with Jorge Barreto, who had already 
come up, and they killed some Moors; and as the king 
had no garrison of men there, the Moors who came up, 
finding themselves badly used by our matchlocks, betook 
themselves to fiight, and left the place. 

When Afonso Dalboquerque saw that it was deserted, 
and that there was nothing more to be feared, he ordered all 
the provisions to be carried into the boats ; and while they 
were proceeding with this booty, they heard a gun fired 
in their own direction, so he ordered the men to assemble 
together at once, for it seemed to him to be a signal for 
doing so, and proceeded with them all in a body straight 
to the shore. And when he arrived there Duarte de Sousa 
informed him that as he was taking in water he had seen a 
captain with thirty Moors and guns on camels, and he had 
withdrawn to the boats as soon as he caught sight of them, 
and kept clear of them ; yet the captains had ordered the 
Moors to take down the guns from the camels, and com- 



AFONSO DALBOQUBRQUB. 


185 


menced firing, bat at the first shots, seeing oar men coming 
up, the Moors had replaced the gans on the camels and with- 
drawn very rapidly. So Afonso Dalboqaerqae finished taking 
in water and set off, and on his arrival at the ships, was in- 
formed that Jofto da Nova had gone by night in his skiff to 
land, to parley with the renegades and with some of the 
servants of Gogeatar, at which he was very angry, for it was 
withoat his permission, and he had left him in charge of the 
fleet in his name. 


CHAPTER L. 

Of what passed between the great Afonso Dalhoquerqne and Joio da 
Nova, when he would not go to Nabandd, whither he was ordered 
toga 

On the day following that on which Afonso Dalboqaerqae 
had retamed to the ships, he sent word to Jofto da Nova 
and Francisco de Tavora that he had news that a caravan 
coming from Persia towards Ormoz with supplies and other 
merchandise had arrived at the port of Naband4, and they 
were to make ready with their men to go thither, bat first 
to come on board his ship, that he might give them instruc- 
tions in what they were to do. Francisco de Tavora, on 
receiving the message, made ready at once, and came on 
board the flagship at the appointed time ; and as it was 
late, and Jofto da Nova did not come, Afonso Dalboqaerqae 
sent to ask why he delayed, for FranciBoo de Tavora had 
been waiting many hoars for him there; and Jofto da Nova 
sent word to say that the delay was owing to the fact that 
the men of his ship Would not accompany him, and he would 
not go by himsdf. Afonso Dalboqaerqae, being already 
annoyed at what he had done daring his absence at the 
Island of Qaeixome, and enraged still farther at this reply, 
went into his boat with Jofto Estfto, scrivener to the fleet. 



186 


C0MMINTASI£8 OF 


and a few men, and proceeded at this late hoar of the night 
to Jofto da Nova's ship ; and on entering it, as he saw the 
men in an nproarioos state^ and an attitude of defiance, he 
dissembled, and bade Jo&o da Nova to cause them to embark 
in the boats, while he (Jofto) went to the flagship. But he 
(as a man not altogether free from the blame) would not do 
so, and told him these men were unwilling to go and fight 
on land, for they were not under any obligation to do so, and 
if he desired them to go there, he ought to order tiiat th^ 
should receive their share of the twenty thousand sBenqfins 
which the King of Ormuz had paid as tribute. 

Afonso Dalboquerque told him that he would give him 
an answer upon this question as soon as he had ordered his 
men to embark. And although he reiterated his request 
veiy often, he always kept putting it off, on the ground that 
his men would not do so. Now, as Afonso Dalboquerque 
was well aware that it all arose from Jofto da Nova and 
not from the men, he said to him : — I have known for 
many days of the designs which you and the other captains 
are plotting, and have concealed it all, making always as 
though I did not know of them, for I desired to complete 
this fortress in peace, and you have all so. acted that every- 
thing is likely to be lost. And not content with this, when 
1 was in the Island of Qneizome, leaving you by yourself 
with all my authority, in charge of this fleet, you went to 
land to parley with the besieged enemies, and with the men 
who fled from me, although you had not my permission to 
be able to do this. And this disobedience the men of your 
ship show towards me arises from your having incited them 
to mutiny against me, asserting that I have appropriated 
the share which belongs to them of the twenty thousand 
xerafins which the King of Ormuz has paid as tribute^ and 
that the King of Portugal ordered me to divide the money 
in the instructions he gave me, though it is not so. And 
all this is done to the end, that I should quit this under- 



AFONSO DALBOQUBRQUE. 


187 


taking, for you all of yon desire to make your way to ludia 
to take in full cargoes, being tired of the war, and not 
bearing in mind that this is an obligation required as much 
from you all as from me, and that it behoves us to give a 
good account to the king, our master, of this kingdom which 
we have gained. And it is very evident that Cogeatar 
suffers all these troubles and necessities without being 
willing to deliver up to me four Christians, because he well 
knows that you all advise me to leave off this war stid be 
gone, but the king, our master, shall know whose fault it is.^' 
Jofto da Nova was not much pleased at these matters 
which Afonso Dalboquerque mentioned, and began to ex- 
culpate himself, and, as regards the inciting the men of his 
ship to mutiny, he desired him to ask them how many 
times he had reproved them, and tried to compel them to 
embark without their obeying; but what was mentioned 
about the cargoes was true, for when at Calicut they had 
begged his permission to depart and make their way to 
India, it was in order to load his ship and sail away to 
Portugal, in accordance with the order given to him by 
TristSo da Cunha at ^ocotora so to do, in order to carry 
him back news before his departure of what he had done 
on this coast, and that if he chose to. depart without his 
permission he would do so with impunity. And as JoRo 
da Nova was of an obstinate and haughty spirit, he began 
to utter a number of silly things, and make a great outcry, 
in such a manner tlmt the hubbub was so loud in the ship 
that the Moors, who were stationed on the walls of the city 
on the watch, commenced crying out loudly, and fired four 
shots of artilleiy, speaking much against Afonso Dalboqner- 
qu^ as though they knew the reason for that noise and dis- 
turbance. And when he perceived these things, and that 
fair words were no longer of any avail, it appeared to him 
that for the credit of his person it would be more honourable 
to kill him there and then than to permit him to be disobc- 



188 


COMMENTABIKS OF 


dieni^ and lie snatched a sword from a cabin boy whom he 
came across, and fell upon those who were the anthers of 
this disturbance on the deck, and made them embark, and, 
approaching Jofto da Nova, seized him by the neck, and 
bade him embark at once. 

When the ship^s company beheld Afonso Dalboqnerqne 
wrestling with Jo&o da Nora, there was not one who dared 
say anything more, and all set about embarking. Jofto da 
Nova, finding himself arrested (in excuse for what he had 
done, although it was very dishonourable), pulled at his 
own beard, which he used to wear veiy long, and taking 
out some hairs, which he wrapped in a handkerchief, began 
to cry out in a loud voice : I will betake me to the king, 
and in presence of his council will beg of him to do justice 
to these hairs of my beard which thou hast plucked out in 
payment, forsooth, for the service I have rendered in these 
parts of India.^’ Afonso Dalboqnerqne replied sternly to 
him : " I never laicPhands upon your beard, and even if I 
had plucked it all out by the roots for what you have done, 
and for having disobeyed me, not even for this will the 
king, our master, order my head to bo cut off ; but if I had 
treated yon and the other captains according to the strict 
letter of my instructions, when yon all began to damage 
our affiiirs at Ormuz, they would not be in the state in which 
they are now; but I bore with yon with great patience, 
thinking that thus the king's interest would be better 
served, and this was what I was ever aiming at." And not 
caring to hold any more intercourse with him, he made him 
embark, and all the rest of the mutineers as well, and re- 
turned to his own ship veiy late at night ; and on the fol- 
lowing day he sent Jofto da Nova in custody, upon his oath 
of allegiance, to the ship commanded by Francisoo de Tavora, 
and told Jofto Estfto, the scrivener to the fleet, to hold an 
inquiry, in order to discover who was gpiilty of this mutiny. 

The result of this inquiry was that the captain and all the 



AFONSO DALBOQUSBQUE. 


189 


men were found to be so guilty that it was thought to be 
better counsel to forgive them, considering the times they 
had fallen upon, and the necessity there was of them, than 
to punish them as they deserved ; and in order to wean the 
men from taking further part in the mutiny, he gave to each 
ten xerafins in part payment of what might accrue to his 
share in the twenty thousand xerafins of tribute, if it were 
found right that they should have it, and, if not, it was to 
be deducted from their pay; and he ordered them to return 
to the ship, and released Jofto da Nova from custody, and 
returned him his captaincy, not caring to hear any more of 
his guilty but leaving the punishment of it for the king to 
settle, although he had, in the instructions gpven to him, 
granted him power for all. 


CHAPTER LI. 

How the great Afonso Dalboquerqne returned to the Idand of Qaeizome 
with determination of taking water, and of the rout he made of the 
men whom the king had there for its defence. 

Notwithstanding all these differences which the great 
Afonso Dalboquerque had every day with the captains, and 
which caused him much pains, yet he did not cease to seek a 
remedy by which to obtain water for his fleet, of which there 
was great need ; and although in the Island of Queixome, 
which was close at hand, he could no longer obtain it without 
force of arms, because of the numerous forces which the 
king had sent there after the mutiny, for all this he hAil 
made up his mind to go there, and, before he set out, 
desired to be informed by the Moors, whom he had captured 
in Arbes, in what place the captains and men lodged whom 
the king had sent to keep guard over the weUs. The Moors 
told him that the headquarters were in a large town called 
Queixome, and from it all the other settlements were sup- 



190 


COMMENTARIES OF 


plied. Afonso DalboqiierquCj upon receipt of this informa- 
tion, gave orders to J0S.0 da Nova and Afonso Lopez to 
make ready with all their forces to accompany him, and to 
Antonio do Gampo to provide the paraos^ with Moors to 
beach them, in order to load with water, and he left Fran- 
cisco de Tavora and Manuel Telez in charge over the ships. 

So, when midnight was come, they set out, and arrived 
before Qneixome so soon, that it was necessary to come to 
anchor nntil it was time to see where they conld disembark ; 
and when dawn began to appear Afonso Dalboquerque 
ordered the boats to make for the land, and disembarked 
with all the company, and told Jo 9 .o da Nova and Afonso 
Lopez da Costa to take their division beforehand and march 
straight upon the place, and attack it without loss of time, 
and ordered Jorge Barreto, with fifty men, to attack it from 
the inner or land side, to draw off the Moors from collecting 
at any part, and they wonld thus all meet there ; and after 
giving them these directions he set out with the remaining 
men, marching direct towards the place, to succour the cap- 
tains. Jofto da Nova and Afonso Lopez da Costa made 
such haste, that they arrived before Jorge Barreto at the 
head of the town, and attacked some large houses, wherein 
were three captains of the King of Ormuz, just in the act 
of mounting their horses, and some few bowmen. As soon 
as Jofto da Nova and Afonso Lopez da Costa perceived 
there were people in the houses, they closed up with the 
dck>rs and broke them in with axes, and got in along with 
them all in confusion; while Jorge Barreto, who by this time 
had come up, proceeded to attack them behind the houses, 
upon the top of the walls of some countiy houses. The 
Moors, now that the gates leading to the streets were broken 
open, assembled together in a courtyard and defended them- 
selvea there for some time without anyone being able to 
get in to them ; but onr men, being ashamed at the delay, 
attacked them with gpreat vigour, and forced an entry. And, in 



AFONSO DALBOQUBRQUE. 


191 


the moment of getting in they wounded JoiLo da Nova^ who 
was the firstj and the Meirinho^ and steward of his ship, and 
killed one of his sailors ; but our party revenged themselves 
amply, for they put the three captains to death who were 
getting on their horses to flee away, and all the bowmen 
who were with them. 

All this was done so rapidly, and the flght was so well 
managed, that although Afonso Dalboquerque was stationed 
veiy close to these houses, wherein all this was going on, 
he did not hear anything that was passing inside; and 
when he entered the courtyard where our men were, and 
beheld so much blood and so many dead Moors, he began 
to be loud in his praises of the captains and all the rest of 
the people, and averred that he would be recompensed for 
all his services if the king, D. Manuel, his master, could have 
seen them fighting from those balconies. Then he went 
out again from the houses towards a terrace, and com- 
manded Aires de Sousa, and FernSLo Soarez, and the others, 
to mount upon the horses which were there and scour the 
country all round, and give no quarter to anyone they should 
meet. This they did, and put to death , many Moors, as 
well as women and children, and collected all the cattle they 
could find, and returned to the place where Afonso Dalbo- 
querque stood. And when they were come back he ordered 
that the horses should be killed, that the Moors might not 
make use of them, and had all the supplies carried into the 
boats, and returned with this victory to the ships ; but he 
would not allow them to set the place on fire, for it was well 
supplied with all sorts oi provisions, and he was in hopes 
that whenever the boats returned for water they might each 
time take away a little. He left Antonio do Campo in his 
diip on guard over the pools to protect those whom he 
might send for water ; and as soon as he arrived at the ships 

^ The exact duty of this oflSeer is not ascertained, but probably oor- 
reqponded to that of the quartermaster or boatswain. 



192 


COXHENTABI£S OF 


he ordered them to beach a parao full of the principal 
Moors who had been killed there, upon the coast of the city, 
and as these were honourable men and of great esteem, 
there was much lamentation made over them. 

As soon as the paraos had discharged their supplies, 
Afonso Dalboqnerque ordered Francisco de Tavora and 
Jorge Barreto to go to Queixome, where Antonio do Campo 
was stationed, to bring back all the water and supplies that 
they could get ; and after they were started, Antonio do 
Gampo’s pilot arrived with intelligence for Afonso Dalbo- 
qnerqne, and gave him to understand that from the mast- 
head of his ship he conld see many ships at sea coming np 
nnderweigh opposite the Island of Lara, and begged he 
would say what he had best do. Now, because it was but 
the day before that he had come from the place, and there 
was no news then of sncb a fleet, he could not make up his 
mind what it conld be ; and in order to make more sure of it 
he ordered them to bring before him two noble Moors whom 
he had captured in the island, and inquired of them what 
ships these might be. One of them told him that they 
mast be some which Cogeatar had sent for from Jnlfar to 
proceed in them with the king and all his honsdiold to the 
same island, for there were no means of assistance at hand, 
as Cogeatar wonld not permit any more people to enter the 
city while he was there, in consequence of the great dearth 
of supplies and water that there was ; and the other Moor 
said that so he thought also, for the night before they were 
captured, a servant of Cogeatar had passed by in great 
haste, and told him that he was going to Jul&r with a 
message for the Gnazil to send men and ships, but he did 
not know for what reason. 



AFOKSO DALBOgUERQUE. 


193 


CHAPTER LH. 

How the great Afonso Didbbquerqne ordered Afonso Lopez da Costa 
and Manuel Telez to go and join Antonio do Gampo, and attack 
tile Moorish fleet, and how they left him and sailed away to India. 

At this newBj wliicli the g^reat Afonso Dalboquerque re- 
ceived of the arrival of these ships off the Island of Lara^ 
he sent immediately that night a despatch to Afonso Lopez 
da Costa and Manuel Telez to go and unite with Antonio 
do Campo^ giving them notice (from the information he had 
of the Moors captured in the Island of Queizome) of the 
fleet and the people in it^ who they were; and so also 
he sent to tell Antonio do Gampo how he ought to act in 
approaching the fleet to flght with it^ and by Men Rodriguez; 
constable of the Gunners^ the bearer of the despatch, he 
was to send back word how he fared, for if hd were in want 
of assistance he would go in person with all the rest of the 
ships. As soon as the despatch was given to them, Manuel 
Telez and Afonso Lopez da Costa weighed anchor and stood 
over to the Idand of Queizome, where Antonio do Campo 
was stationed, and gave him Afonso Dalboquerque’s message, 
and then they all three agreed to proceed to attack the 
Moorish fleet; and as they sailed along, .just beginning to 
espy a point of the island, directly the Moors caught sight 
of our vessels they slipped their cables and fled away by 
rowing and sailing, while our captains chased them for two 
leagues distance, but could not come up with them. And as 
it was now night they returned and anchored in the port of 
the island, where the Moorish fleet had been anchored, and 
from thence wrote, through Men Rodriguez, to Afonso 
Dalboquerque an account of what they had done, and how 
they were waiting his further orders for their future pro« 
ceedings. 

Men Rodriguez was no sooner arrived with this message 
when he was sent back' to order Afonso Lopez da Costa and 


o 



194 


COMMSNTABIES OF 


Antonio do Campo^ since the Moorish fleet had fled^ to 
return and take np their original positions in the blockade 
of the citj^ and Manuel Telez to go and anchor close to the 
flagship^ as the chief captain intended to send him to 
carry the supplies to tbe fortress of Qocotora, as he had 
told him. Men Rodriguez set about this at once, and pro- 
ceeded forthwith to the Island of Lara, where all these 
captains remained, and on his arrival gave them this message, 
to which they replied that they were jnst then taking in 
water, but when they had taken in a sufficient quantity, they 
would return without delay to the stations appointed for them. 
Men Rodriguez returned, and on the way met with Francisco 
de Tavoraand Jorge Barreto, coming from the Island of 
Queixome laden with water, and they gave him an old Moor, 
an inhabitant of the Island of Lara, whom they had captured 
there, to carry with him,and this man was a pilot who had fled 
to Cananor from Antonio de Saldanha, on his flrst voyage to 
India. On Men Rodriguez's arrival, he handed over the Moor 
to Afonso Dalboqnerque, and told him how he had found 
all these captains walking along the beach, apart from the 
men, and how Afonso Lopez da Costa had said with great 
arrogance to him : Tell our captain general that I say 
what sort of men are these for him to send them their shares 
of the fifteen thousand xerafina perfumed on board 7" 

Afonso Dalboqnerque was not pleased at this that Men 
Rodriguez said, and asked the Moor what fleet that was, 
and what men there were in it. He told him there were 
sixty vessels, and they brought four thousand men under a 
captain named Xaquear, who came by order of Cc^eatar to 
keep guard over all those watering places, in order that his 
men might not get their water there. After the lapse of 
two days, when Afonso Dalboqnerque perceived that the 
captains did not proceed to take np their positions as he 
had ordered them, nor send any message, he sent Femfto 
Soarez in the boat of the Flor de la and Pero Gon- 



AFONSO OALBOQUEBQUE. 


195 


qalvezj chief pilots in the skiff of the Oirne, to go and seek 
for them^ and tell them he was very much alarmed at not 
seeing them with their ships in the places he had assigned 
them. Femfto Soarez^ on his amval at the island^ as he did 
not find them^ put in to shore and seized a Moor^ who told 
him that those three captains who used to be there had 
taken in water and furnished themselves with plenty of fresh 
salted and pickled meat in jars^ and set sail^ and steered 
towards the Cape of Magandi. 

FemSo Soarez returned with this information which he 
had obtained^ and told Afonso Dalboquerque what had hap- 
pened with the captains^ and how the Moorish fleet was 
lying at anchor between the islands of Lara and Queixome. 
He was much annoyed at their desertion^ leaving the Moor- 
ish fleet in a position to attack^ and himself blockading so 
large a city with three ships^ so that a fleets however small 
it might bOj could inflict much damage upon him. At so 
unexpected an event he remained in suspense for the space 
of six days, without knowing what to decide upon doing, 
and he was the more in doubt when he heard the gpreat 
uproar made by the Moors in the city, like men who were 
aware of the desertion of the captains. On the one side 
he saw the city (owing to the great distress it suffered by 
hunger and thirst) surrendered if he did not raise the 
blockade ; on the other side, he felt the great obligation he 
was under of supplying the fortress of Qocotora with supplies, 
of which it was in the utmost need, and which Manuel Telez 
had carried off on board his ship. After long consideration, 
however, he came to the conclusion that it would be safer 
conduct to raise the blockade, and proceed to the succouring 
of the fortress of Qocotora with what few supplies he had, 
and leave the affairs of Ormuz in the hands of Qod, for He 
would give him another opportunity, wherein He would be 
better able to assist him. So not without some gpuef at the 
idea of quitting Ormuz, he went on board the ship of JoSo 



196 


G011MENTABIK3 OF 


da Nova^ and told him that his wish was now accomplished, 
seeing that Antonio do Gampo^ Afonso Lopez da Costa^ and 
Manuel Telez had fled away to India^ and that his own de- 
termination was to proceed to the succour of the fortress 
of ^ocotora with some supplies, as Manuel Telez had carried 
away those placed on board his ship ; and he bade him 
make ready, for he was to accompany him as far as Cape 
Becalgate, and from that point bear away to India. 

Joflo da Nova assured him that it was no pleasure to him 
if the captains had fled away from him, and that he had 
never joined with them in such a design; but, on the 
contrary, he thought they had done very wrong, and he 
begged he would have the kindness, as he had given him 
permission to set out for India, to enlarge the parole which 
had been demanded of him. Afonso Dalboquerque granted 
his request, and fitted out Pedralyarez, the constable's 
assistant, to accompany him, bearing letters for the vice- 
roy, wherein he gave him an account of the flight of the 
captains, and how they had left him when on guard over 
the city, having certain intelligence that the Sultan’s fleet 
was in Diu, making ready with the King of Cambaya to fall 
upon him, which intelligence he had gained from some Moors 
who were captured in a ship belonging to Ormuz, which 
came from Diu, Gogeatar having sent it thither to demand 
this assistance. And he begged his lordship that if these 
captains of his made their way thither, that he would gpve 
them that punishment which they so richly deserved, for 
leaving their captain general at such a juncture, and de- 
serting from him. He gave permission also to Jorge Barreto, 
his cousin, to go, because he begged him to do so, and he 
commanded Jofto Estfto and JoSLo Teixeira (whose oath was 
taken upon the Holy Gospels) to commence a legal inquiry 
throughout the ships, concerning the flight of the captains, 
and after it had been taken, he sent it to Portugal, to D. 
Manuel, the king, that he might be certified how they had 



AFONSO DALBOQUEBQUE. 


197 


deserted and at what kind of season they had fled away ; 

and he also gave permission to some of the men who held 
the king's commissions^ to serve as officers and captains, 
and to all he ordered to be paid all that was their due with 
respect to their wages and allowances, that had been agreed 
upon up to that present time. 


CHAPTER LIII. 

How the great Afonso Dalboqueique set out towards CJocotora, and 
having arrived at the island, sent Francisco de Tavora to Mdinde 
to seek for supplies, and what took place. 

Afonso Dalboquerque was just on the point of sailing with 
all his ships in order, when two Moors came down close by 
our fortress, and began to make signals with a flag ; and at 
sight of them he sent Aires de Sousa, Jofto Estfto, and 
Caspar Rodriguez, the interpreter, to land, to see what they 
wanted. The Moors told them to say to the chief captain 
that the king was very desirous of retaining his friendship, 
and would do whatever he desired ; but as for the four men, 
he could not return them to him, for they had now become 
his brothers. Afonso Dalboquerque, knowing that all this 
proceeded from some trickeiy and artfulness of Cogeatar, 
who would have discovered the diminution of the fleet by 
this time, replied that not once but often he had sent him 
word that he would make no arrangement with him, without 
he first of all delivered up to him his men ; and now he 
would do so with worse will, since they hi^ been made to 
abjure the faith of Jesus Christ in the mosques of Mahomet; 
but if he were to waive this demand, the king, his lord, 
would order his head to be cut off as soon as he arrived in 
Portugid; yet he would promise him (if our Lord only gave 
liifn a little longer life) that he would very quickly deprive 
him of the government of the kingdom of Ormuz, and would 



198 


C0MMEKTAB1S8 OF 


finiali the fortress^ which he now left only begun, and then 
he would requite him doubly for all the loss and damage 
which his fleet had received. He ordered also Jofto Est&o 
to notify all this to him in a formal manner, and prepare a 
public instrument containing an account of all that had 
happened up to that hour. 

And for all that this declaration, which he ordered to be 
made to Cogeatar, appeared then to be a mere piece of 
pleasantry, nevertheless, in the second conquest of the 
kingdom of Ormiiz he performed it all, causing him to refund 
him all the expenses he had been put to without any diminu- 
tion. So Aires de Sousa went with this message to land, and, 
without entering into any further negotiations with them, 
returned; and on his arrival at the ships, Afonso Dalbo- 
querque sent for Francisco da Tavon^ and took his oath of 
allegiance, fearing that he was minded to desert, as I have 
before mentioned, and set sail with Jo&o da Nova in his 
company. But on reaching Qoa, he missed seeing the Flor 
de la Ma/r one morning, and, thinking that it had taken a 
different course, but would return to his company, he passed 
the whole day without seeing it ; and as he did not see it 
on the following day, he came to the conclusion that it had 
sailed away to India also. And he was very much annoyed 
at Jo&o da Nova parting from him without mentioning it to 
him, after agreeing to bear him company as far as Cape 
Besalgate, and made his way straight to Qocotora; and 
being in the latitude of this cape, they had sight of a ship, 
and chased it aU the day long, but lost sight of it at night, 
and continued their voyage. And as soon as they entered 
into the gulf, they captured a Moorish ship, which came from 
Mecca very rich : and twenty days after setting out from 
Ormuz, they came to anchor in the port of the island, and 
found that the captain of the fortress was very ill, and that 
the garrison were suffering from such want of provisions 
that they had nothing left to eat but palm leaves, and a 



AFONSO I}ALBOQnBRQnE. 


199 


fruit they found 'growing wild in the woods^ four of them 
being already deadj and all the rest very ill. But on the 
arrival of Afonso Dalboquerque they became very much 
delighted^ for he provided them with supplies^ and all other 
things that were necessary for their sickness. 

To Don Afonso (the captain of the fort) he gave an account 
of all that had taken place at Ormuz^ and of the flight of the 
captains, and how Manuel Telez had carried away with him 
all the supplies and drugs which he had entrusted him with to 
bring to them ; and in order to please the people still more, 
he gave them all a share in the contents of the ship which 
they had taken on their way, and ordered that they should 
be paid eight months’ salary, which was due to them. And 
after all had been satiafled and contented, he set about 
giving orders for the repair of the boats wl^ich he carried, 
for they were now much injured by dryrot, and the ships 
too in some measure required some necessary repairs. As 
soon as all was in good trim, he despatched Francisco de 
Tavora, with money and merchandise, to go to Melinde and 
freight his ship with supplies, for the fortress had not 
sufficient for the men it contained ; and ho told him that 
after taking the supplies on board, he was to go and meet 
him at Cape Gnardafum, bringing with him whatever vessels 
he might And in Melinde, to go into winter quarters in May 
at Qocotora. 

Having come to this arrangement, they set sail, and 
Francisco de Tavora made his way towards Melinde, and 
Afonso Dalboquerque steered his course for the Island of 
Bedalcuria,^ to cruise about there for a few days, because 
the Moorish pilots had informed him that the ships which 
made for Cape Gnardafum would be more easily inter- 
cepted in that latitude than in any other. On his arrival 
at the port of the island, as soon as he had cast anchor, he 

^ Probably the island called Abd-el-Kuiy, between Socotra and 
Cape Gnardafnm. 



200 


COMMENTARIES OF 


ordered twenty men to be put on shore, with two Moors 
whom ho had brought from Qocotora, and who were well 
acquainted with the language, in order to seize upon some 
native Moor, and they managed so well that they took six ; 
and Afonso Dalboquerque ordered them, after they had 
been brought on ^oard, to be asked about amber (for there 
is a great quantity of it on this island), and also whether 
any Moorish ships had passed by this course to India. 
Thereupon they showed him a piece of amber, of about one 
marco ^ by weight, and told him it was but a few days ago 
since a ship from India had touched there, and been wrecked 
by the east winds in that harbour, and the men had taken 
from the natives all the amber they had, and after con- 
structing a small zamhuco out of the timbers of the ship, 
had sailed away in it. The Moors of this island are a degraded 
people, and live in huts covered with seaweed ; there are 
about forty inhabitants in the colony ; they go about clothed 
in skins; they keep large flocks and herds; their food 
consists of fish, milk, and flesh ; the land is very unhealthy. 

And because the people began to grow sick at the time 
that they remained there, Afonso l)alboquerque changed 
the determination he had formed of staying there, and 
ordered the Moors who had been captured to be put on 
shore, and set sail, and proceeded to cast anchor within 
shelter of the Cape of Guardafum, and there he remained 
at anchor all alone, always keeping a man on the look out 
upon the summit of the high ground, which lies upon the 
front of the cape, and from which a view of Bedalcuria and 
of all the sea thereabouts may be had ; and the Moors of a 
settlement which is there gave him all kinds of necessary 
provisions and water in exchange for clothes. Afonso Dalbo- 
querque cruised about this parallel of Gape Guardafum from 
the fifteenth of January to the thirteenth day of May 
without seeing more than four ships, three of which escaped 
> Marco, a weight equivalent to eight ounces. 



AFONSO DALBOQUEBQUE. 


201 


hinij for they caught sight of him from afar off^ and had tho 
advantage of the wind, and the one which he captured carried 
but little merchandise, and came from the Island of Diva, 
which is in the sea of Ceylon. 

The people of this land are very domesticated, and Afonso 
Dalboquorque treated them veiy well ; and from this cape, 
as far as the mouth of the straits, they have no king; they 
are armed with shields and Moorish swords; they have 
large herds of cattle and many camels, of which they 
make use. Throughout the interior there is plenty of 
myrrh, which they collect and sell, and in the mountains 
many trees, from which they obtain incense, which our 
people, in company with the Moors, went to collect very 
often, as long as they remained there : they use no money, 
and give nothing for money, but arrange their buying and 
Belling by the interchange of cloth. From the Cape of 
Ouardafum to Feliz there are three harbours-^one is called 
Bendari^aa, the second Bendaraxaa, and the third Bendesy- 
mu^aa ; all these three have fresh water close tb the sea 
board, and each one has its lord, and right in front stand 
Feliz, Metee, Barbora jazira, and Barbora fiara, and nearest 
of all to the gates of the straits of the Bed Sea, along the 
same coast lies Zeilajadit, and from thence to the cape of 
the strait there are no more stations. 


CHAPTER LIV. 

How, on the arrival of Francisco de Tavora at Cape Guardafum, the 
great Afonso Dalboquerque immediately despatched FernlSo Gomez, 
together with the Moor whom TristSo da Cunha had left in Melinde, 
to go to the Preste, and how he set off towards Qocotora, and of 
what further took place. 

The end of April was now come, when Francisco de Tavora 
arrived at the Cape of Guardafum, where the great Afonso 
Dalboquerque was stationed, and brought with him in his 




202 


GOMXBMTABIBS 07 


company Diogo de Melo and Martim Goelho^ whom he found 
at Melinde, having come from Portugal; and while all 
three were in the latitude of Magadaxo, they captured a 
ship of Cambaya, laden with clothing, and after having 
stripped her of all she carried, they set her on fire. Afonso 
Dalboquerque was highly delighted at the arrival of Diogo 
de Melo and Martin Coelho, and divided with them the spoils 
of the prize ship ; and after conversing upon the news from 
Portugal, Francisco de Tavora told him that at Melinde he 
had met the commander. Buy Soarez, and had requested 
him to accompany him, for he was under an obligation to 
do sp, and the other captains had gone their way to India, 
and in addition to this he had made him many other requisi- 
tions through his scrivener, but all the answer he got was 
that he was desirous of proceeding to the viceroy. He 
said, too, that he had also brought with him Fernfto Gomez 
and the Moor whom Tristfto da Gunha had left there under 
charge of the captain of Melinde, that they might be 
forwarded to Gape Guardafum, and thence proceed on the 
journey assigned them by the king; and Femfto Gomez 
had requested him to carry them with him since the captain 
had not put into execution what Tristfto da Gunha had left 
with him to do so long ago. 

Afonso Dalboquerque was much surprised when he saw 
them, for it was so long since they had set out that he 
thought they were by this time in Portugal ; and he asked 
the Moor what road he intended to pursue, and by what 
means he purposed to return to Portugal. The Moor told 
him that his road lay through the interior of Barbora Zeila, 
and through the land of the Gadandin, a Moorish captain 
who was prosecuting a war with another captain of Preste 
Jo&o, for the one land is contiguous to the other ; and that 
the caravan that went from Zeila to Preste Jofto was always 
secure, for it enjoyed a safe guard from both, and his return 
to Portugal would lie through Tambocatu, and thence to 



AFONSO DAI.BOQUBBQUE. 


203 


Arguiiij along the river Qanaga/ for he had already made 
this journey. Afonso Dalboquerque ordered for each of 
them fifty xerajma for their expenses^ for the Moor was 
unwilling to receive morCj telling him that he could not 
carry with him a worse enemy than money : he also wrote 
for them a letter in Arabic^ and another in Portuguese. 

The Moor was very reserved and taciturn, and not alto- 
gether pleased with Femfto Gomez, for he was very talka- 
tive, and he was afraid he would let something slip from 
him, whereby they would be all lost, and he desired Afonso 
Dalboquerque would give him another companion, but he 
would not, as it had already been settled by TristSLo da 
Cunha. And having set them on their way he ordered 
them to be carried in a boat by Nuno Yaz de Castelo-branco 
to land below Port Feliz, and from that point they com- 
menced their journey, giving out to the native Moors that 
they were merchants who had lost their ship and merchan- 
dise, and they alone saved. After they were gone Afonso 
Dalboquerque still remained where he was at the cape with 
the other captains until the fifteenth of May, when the 
Moorish pilot told him that the monsoon for the ships was 
now passed, and if he was still of a mind to make a visit to 
Aden, as originally intended, he would not be able to return 
to winter quarters at Qocotora, for at that season the current 
sets towards the north, and it would be perfectly impossible 
for them to make the island. So with this report they 
weighed anchors, and set their sails, and without any thing 
of consequence taking place during the run, they came to 
anchor in front of the fortress of St. Miguel, with the de- 
termination of supplying it with the provisions they had on 
board, and from that place they meant to go and winter at 
Mascate. And because they found the people of the land 
had risen against the garrison, who had killed some of their 

> This passage evidently relates to a route through Timbuctoo and 
along the course of the river Senegal. 



204 


COMMENTARIES OF 


men^ he changed his plan, and remained here all that winter 
to see if he could pacify them, and ordered the factor of his 
fleet to see that he forwarded to the fortress all the supplies, 
and that none remained behind in the ships more than they 
would require for the voyage. 

Then Afonso Dalboquerque, with the forces he had brought 
with him, began to wage war upon the natives, and these, 
after being thoroughly beaten, and paying the penalty due 
for the murder of our men, sent, desiring to make peace, 
and he received their petition, on consideration of their 
paying every year to the people in the fortress a tribute of 
six hundred head of sheep, and twenty cows, and forty 
bags of dates. Upon the conclusion of this agreement, and 
the return of all to the obedience of D. Afonso, the captain, 
he ordered his ships to be repaired and Vkjusta of fourteen 
banks of oars to be constructed to accompany him, for he 
was determined to pay a visit to Ormuz ; and during this 
winter that he spent there, the storms were so violent and 
continuous that very often the ships were in great danger 
of being lost ; and because the Rey Orande had very high 
castles, thereby running a greater risk of being lost than the 
other ships, it was necessary, according to the advice of the 
masters and pilots, to order them to be cut away. Fran- 
cisco de Tavora was so much annoyed at this that he said 
to Afonso Dalboquerque that as he had oi'dered his ship to 
be cut down, he might give the command of her to any 
one he chose, for he for his part did not want her, and would 
sail no longer in her; and he grew veiy intemperate in his 
language about it. Yet, for all that these exhibitions of 
temper had been shown now for a long time, he would not 
give him any answer, and dissembled with him, though he 
had much reason to chastise him ; for he had sent him to 
Melinde to search for provisions, but he omitted lading his 
ship with them, choosing rather to cruise about after prizes 
along that coast, and he brought back with him so few 



AFONSO DALBOQUBBQUE. 


205 


supplies^ that when all the ships had been furnished with 
what they required of necessity for their voyage, there would 
not have been left a sufficienqr for the people of the fortress 
for three months, had it not been for the dates, and other 
things which the natives were bound to deliver. 

After three days Francisco de Tavora perceived that he 
was much to blame for the words he had spoken in such 
an unreasonable manner to Afonso Dalboquerque, and sent 
to ask his forgiveness through D. Afonso de Noronha, his 
nephew, and begged that he might be restored to his ship, 
D. Afonso Dalboquerque, however, replied that he was now 
quite disgusted with the bad behaviour of Francisco de 
Tavora, particularly after treating him so considerately as 
he had done, and as he had quitted his ship without any 
cause, he was not going to restore it to him, and as they 
were now on their way to India, the viceroy might give it 
back to him. 


CHAPTER LV 

How Manuel Telez, Afonso Lopez da Costa, and Antonio do Campo, 
arrived in India and made depositions respecting the great Afonso 
Dalboquerque to the Viceroy: and of the inquiry whirii he ordered 
to be made in the matter. 

Kow, as these captains had come to the determination of 
leaving the great Afonso Dalboquerque many days before 
they actually did so, and meant to go to India to the viceroy, 
as soon as Men Rodriguez quitted the Island of Lara, they 
furnished their ships with water and supplies, and set sail, 
and arrived in a few days at Cochim ; and when they had 
disembarked, all three proceeded together to the viceroy, 
and made before him a great outcry, exclaiming that the 
king, D. Manuel, had sent them in Afonso Dalboquerque‘'s 
company to proceed with him to Cape Guardafum, and lie 



206 


COHMBNTABIES OF 


in wait for the ships that went to Meca laden with spices, 
but he had quitted this road and made his way to the 
coast of the kingdom of Ormuz, and cruised continually 
about there, contrary to the advice of them all, carrying 
on a perfectly unprofitable war ; but, not content with this, 
ho had begun to erect a fortress, although the king, D. 
Manuel, had not ordered him to do so; and they, when 
they saw how little to the interest of his majesty this was, 
and that he only did it of his own free will, had sent him 
a remonstrance, which he had answered with very evil 
words, for he was a very harsh sort of man, and veiy hasty, 
without bearing in mind the honour of his men ; and as he 
would do nothing but insist upon the building of the 
fortress, they had made him a second remonstrance, to 
which he in like knanner had not deigned a reply ; and to 
show how much he despised them, and made light of what 
they said to him, although it was all in the interest of the 
king our lord, he had ordered the remonstrance to be placed 
beneath a gateway of the fortress, which was just being 
laid, as if, forsooth, his lordship intended to tread beneath 
his feet the remonstrance they had there presented to him, 
signed by themselves and by Francisco de Tavora, who was 
left behind in prison. They therefore begged his lordship 
that he would give orders to have depositions of all this 
taken down, as they had told it to him, by those heads of 
accusation which they there and then laid against him, and 
when the truth had been arrived at, that he would do them 
justice, and order their necessary papers to be made out for 
them to go to Portugal and demand from the king, D. 
Manuel, reparation for the injuries he had done to them, and 
for the shares of booty he had taken from them without 
being willing to pay them. And the viceroy ordered Gaspar 
Pereira, who acted in the capacity of secretary, to read him 
the requisition, which contained the following : — 

Of the remonstance and protestation which we, Afonso 



AFONSO DALBOQUBBQUE. 


207 


Lopez da Costa, Francisco de Tavora, Manuel Telez^ and 
Antonio do Gampe^ captains of the king our lord, make 
to the verj honourable lord, Afonso Dalboquerque, our chief 
captain, you, Jofto Estfto, scrivener of this fleet, shall give 
us each one his copy, and more if it be necessary, for the 
king our lord, or for the lord viceroy. Whereas it is true 
that his Highness sent us in his company to these parts to 
construct a, fortress in the Island of Qocotora, which the 
Moors had already made, and which we took from them by 
force of arms ; and after completing it, we went to watch the 
straits of the Bed Sea, that no ships should pass to Meca laden 
with spices ; but since he has taken this city of Ormuz, and 
made it tributary to the king, our lord, and established 
in it a factoiy with great peace and mutual agreement, 
without any need of anything else, he, the chief captain, 
ought not to take upon himself to build a fortress, for it is 
very little to the interest of the king and loss of his mate- 
rial, and risk of the men and artillery remaining in it, in 
many respects and reasons which he, the chief captain, will 
not listen to. Nor yet does he heed a certain section of his 
instructions which says, that if he can build a fortress, he 
ought to build it in such a position and manner that it may 
be securely maintained and defended by the men left be- 
hind in it. And he ought to take especial care how far it 
is to the advantage of the king, our lord, and his estate, 
to build it thus. And the other reasons, in addition to 
these, we will lay before His Highness, or his Viceroy of 
India, if necessary. But he ought to bear in min3 that the 
fortress of Qocotora was all this time standing with the 
greater part of its men ill, and with supplies for three months 
[only] counting from the time we left it, and the land con- 
tains no more supplies except those which may arrive there 
from abroad, and that there were yet remaining in it many 
Moors who certainly will endeavour to tamper with the 
Christians of the land, and incite them against our people. 



208 


COMMENTABIES OF 


for these Christians^ being angry at being robbed of their 
cattle against their will^ for they live •by them (and the 
Moors had never taken their cattle from them)^ will be in- 
clined to side with them and keep in favour with them, 
whereby it may fall out that they will cause much trouble 
to our people. And this fortress, which he, the chief captain, 
is building here in Ormuzj cannot be completed so as to 
contain a guard of men and artillery within five months 
more ; and if he, some time during this month of Novem- 
ber, does not quit the place, he will not be able to do so 
for the whole of this year, for the monsoon, favourable for 
watching the Straits, will be past, and this would be very 
prejudicial to the interests of the king, our lord, and the 
fortress of Qocotora would run a great risk of being lost. 
Therefore, we do request him, on the part of the king, our 
lord, and of our lord, the Viceroy, that he will set out 
forthwith to supply the said fortress, according to the in- 
structions given by his Highness, and thereafter enter the 
Straits of the Red Sea. And we do also request him, on 
the behalf of the said lord, that he will immediately send 
from here this ship, Flar de la mar, to the Lord Viceroy, in 
order to be renovated and not destroyed, inasmuch as the 
fieet which then remains is sufficient for the watch over the 
Strait, and in this ship the merchandise, tribute, and ambas- 
sadors can be forwarded, which he intends to send to the 
king, our lord; for it wiU be safer for anything to go 
from India than from here. And much more so, as with the 
merchandise and money he has received by way of tribute, 
this year the lading of the ships may be remedied (hitherto 
deficient), owing to the great failure of eveiy thing in India, 
which would be more to the service of the king, our lord, than 
to send it all to Portugal. And by Jofto da Nova he can 
write of the condition wherein this city of Ormuz is, for his 
lordship to make such provisions thereupon as shall seem 
to him most beneficial to the affairs of his Highness ; since. 



AFONSO DALBOQUESQUB. 


209 


in his instructions^ since he orders him^ that upon gaining 
possession of any kingdom^ or any other thing whatsoever^ 
he is to acquaint him immediately with the fact, that he may 
thereupon make such provision as shall seem best suited 
to his interest. But if he, the lord captain, be unwilling to 
perform all these things contained in this requisition, we 
hereby protest against all the losses, injuries, and diminu- 
tions of the material of our lord the king, and state that 
we are not liable to any blame, for we make this request in 
good time, whereby all may yet be made good. And of this, 
with the reply or without it (if he be unwilling to give a reply), 
you shall give us the said duplicates, with a similar copy of 
our reply if it be required. Signed and sealed by us in the 
port of the City of Ormuz, on the thirteenth of November 
in the year one thousand five hundred and seven.'’ 


CHAPTER LVI. 

How the Vioeioy, D. Francisco Dalmeida, after hearing the captains, 
ordered an information to be laid against the great Afonso Dalbo- 
qneiqne, and what took place with them on hearing the news 
which came to him from PortngaL 

D. Franoisco Dalmeida, upon considering the remon- 
ctrance and the articles which the captains had laid before 
him against the great Afonso Dalboquerque, ordered Caspar 
Pereira, who acted as his secretary, to draw up an Act of ac- 
cusation, and he prepared an ordinance which contained the 
following statement : — I, D. Frandsoo Dalmeida^ Viceroy 
of the Indies for the king my lord, command you, Gbnqalo 
Fernandez, and FrandsQO Lamprea, public scrivener and 
judicial in these parts of India, arid Fero Yaz> late scrivener 
of the caravel St. Jorge, and Jofto Saramenho, receiver of 
the drfuntoBj that yon all four open this inquiry (acco ding 
to the depositions laid before yon by Mannd Telez, Afonso 
Lopez da Costa, and Antonio do Campo) against Afonso 

p 



210 


COXXSNTABnBS OF 


Dalboqnerqne^ and prosecnte the same by examination in 
order of certain articles which they will communicate to 
you; and Oongslo Fernandez shall conduct the inquiry^ and 
the other three of you be scriveners, and the four shall 
be always present at the taking down of the testimony. 
And as some of the witnesses are not present^ all the testi- 
mony shall be taken upon oath before me, and the testimony 
which they require that is in Cananor shall be sent for and 
taken down there ; and this inquiry shall be conducted in 
the house of Oonqalo Fernandez, inquisitor, wherein all that 
is done every day shall remain locked up in a chest with 
three keys of which each scrivener shall have one. And you 
four have now sworn upon oath in my presence, adminis- 
tered to you by Gaspar Pereira, to prosecute this inquiry 
well and diligently. Done in Cochim on the twenty-sixth 
day of the month of May. Gaspar Pereira drew this up in 
the year one thousand five hundred and eight. 

''And furthermore I command that, if the witnesses 
m^e any additional statements beyond what is contained 
in the articles, to the advantage of the complainant’s cause, 
you are to write them down ; and. if any witness (after 
having given his testimony) shall return and state that he 
remembers anything more, you are to write this likewise.’^ 

When the Viceroy had made an end of this dispatch 
concerning the remonstrance of the captains, he ordered 
Gaspar Pereira to deliver up all the papers to the scriveners 
and inquisitor who were charged with the execution of the 
suit, and in addition he ordered them to be supplied with a 
paper in seventy heads, drawn up by the said captains 
against Afonso Dalboquerque. What may one say here- 
upon concerning this aflEeur ? except that it was either 
hatred which the Viceroy felt against Afonso Dajbo- 
queique, or else passion, which determined him to proceed 
in this hasty manner without hearing what he had to say 
for himself, and to receive articles against him laid by the 



AFONSO OALBOQUEBQUE. 


211 


captains who had deserted him^ leaving their captain en- 
gaged in a war fighting day and night with arms always 
upon himj instead of reproving them for deserting him and 
fiying to India^ after he had rendered so large and powerful 
a kingdom obedient to the king of Portugal with so small 
a fieet ; yea even to hold him in blame for the want of pro- 
visions experienced by the fortress of Qocotora^ when all 
the while Manuel Telez was cruising about Cochim with his 
ship laden with those very provisions which Afonso Dalbo- 
querque had ready to send to the fortress. I had much to 
say upon this matter, which I omit in order not to digress 
from the history. 

About the period when this business was going on, 
there arrived from Portugal Femflo Soarez and Buy da 
Gunha, in company with Jorge de Aguiar, who set out 
from this kingdom in the year ^8 as chief captain of three 
vessels under orders from the king D. Manuel to join 
the fieet at Cape Guardafum and the coast of Ormuz 
with certain ships, when the great Afonso Dalboquerque 
was to become governor of India. And after the arrival of 
these two captains at Cochim, as the viceroy was sitting 
one day in the harbour with these fidalgos and cavaliers of 
India, Joflo da Nova, Afonso Lopez da Costa, Antonio do 
Campo, and Manuel Telez being also present, he began to 
speak as follows : — Gentlemen, in these ships before you 
letters have come for me, containing very favourable news for 
me, whidi the king our lord has sent, and the import of it is, 
that, having now finished my term of three years, I am to 
return to Portugal, and Afonso Dalboquerque will take my 
post in the government of India. Of a truth our Lord does 
me a great &vour herein, for I am as it were quite dead to 
all that is going on in the world : and my sins have deserved 
ihatbeforemy death I ought to see the troubles which I have 
seen.^^ And so he went on saying many other things which 
signified to them the grief he had at the death of his son. 

p2 



212 


COMMIVTABISS OF 


At tliis news, which the viceroy gave of his return to 
Portugal^ all became very sad, especially JoHo da Nova, and 
the captains who had fled away from the war at Ormuz. 
Antonio do Campo, who was always the ringleader in the 
quarrels that took place in Ormuz between Afonso Dalbo- 
querque and the captains, thinking that hereby he would 
flatter the viceroy, as well as intending to incite those who 
were present against Afonso Dalboquerque, stood up and said: 
^‘Sir, in announcing that the king our lord orders your lord- 
ship to quit this land, and hand over its government to Afonso 
Dalboquerque, your Highness has stated in this how much it 
is to your liking, and I hope in God that, just as the a&irs of 
India are governed by His hand, that so now He may show 
him in due time the error he is making herein, for I hold it for 
an undoubted fact that when Afonso Dalboquerque is known 
by the men in India who pass their lives favoured by the 
love and good deeds which your lordship shows towards 
them, and when they find how troublesome a man he is in 
his actions (of which we were witnesses during the time we 
were with him carrying on the war in Ormuz), there will 
not be a person in India who will not leave him, and 
depart to Portugal, and those who remain with him will do 
BO more from compulsion than of their own free will. And 
as all this is so, your lordship ought not to persevere in 
your intentions of leaving the government of India, without 
first of all informing the king our lord, and sending him a 
written account of the things that Afonso Dalboquerque has 
done ; for it is to be believed that if his Highness knew of 
them he never would have sent such a message.^’ The 
viceroy told him that he could not do otherwise than 
depart and comply with the orders of the king his lord, as 
soon as Jorge de Aguiar came to land ; and if India were 
to be lost the fault would lay at the hands of that man who 
had advised the king to order him to return, and to leave 
the government in the hands of Afonso Dalboquerque. 



AFONSO DALSOQUERQUl. 


218 


CHAPTER LVII. 

How the great Afonso Dalboquerqae set oat from Qocotora to Ormaz, 
and arrived at Ctdayate, and what took place with the captain of 
the city. 

As soon as he had provisioned the fortress of Calajate, 
as I have already mentioned^ the great Afonso Dalboqnerqne 
made himself ready to go to Ormnz^ and set out on the 
fifteenth day of the month of August with the intention of 
steering to the straits^ and getting news of the viceroy^ 
and of India^ for it was now some time since he had heard 
of them; and then^ after doing what he could on that 
coastj he meant to make his way to India. He gave an 
account of these intentions of his to D. Afonso de Noronha^ 
his nephew^ captain of the fortress^ and also notified them 
to the captains in his company. Diogo de Melo^ and Martim 
Coelho^ as they were misinformed by Francisco de Tavora 
of the troubles the fieet had undergone in the conquest of 
the kingdom of Ormuzj and so were anxious to avoid the 
likej made a protest to Afonso Dalhoquerque^ which stated 
that they had come from Portugal to remain in the company 
of the viceroy, and were not under any obligation to him^ 
and therefore they desired him to grant them the favour 
of a licence to sail away to India. He told them to show 
him their instmctionB, and because therein the king’s 
order was contained that on arriving at the place where 
Afonso Dalboquerque was stationed they were to obey him^ 
he obliged them to remain in obedience to him and ordered 
themj under penalty of death, to follow him, and not to 
quit his company, for they could see what a need he had of 
them after the flight of the captains, and he bade the 
scriveners of his ships to prepare papers upon this penalty 
which he had laid upon them. 

When this busmess was ended, all set saQ towards Cape 



214 


COJIXKNTABIIS OF 


Besalgste, and when immediately opposite to Cariamnria 
(because they were too fiur ont to sea) they held a council to 
steer towards the land, and stood about all day without get- 
ting a sight of it ; and when night was come, Pero Gh>n- 
^alvez, chief pilot, ordered them to alter their course and steer 
north-east. Afonso Dalboqnerqne, however, noticing that 
that course would be opposite to the way which he wanted to 
make by his chart, sent for him and all the pilots, and told 
him, that if, in the position and latitude wherein thqr then 
were, they were to sail along that point of the compass which 
he had said, viz., N.E., they would that night run aground, 
therefore he ought to take great care what he was about. 
But, as Pero Gon 9 alyez considered that in his particular 
business he knew better than anybody, he replied in anger, 
that since this was so he would give up the diarge of the 
diip to him, and he might steer wherever he liked, and he 
himself would take his chart and compasses and throw 
them into the sea. Afonso Dalboqnerqne replied to him: — 
"Pero Gonqalves, look to what yon say; do not be put 
ont, for I also know some little about this business, and it 
may be that the Holy Spirit speaks within me, for the 
course, which we must take, is that we should stand out to 
sea again, for if we continue in the course we are now going 
we shall run aground at the point of Madri9aa; but if you 
do not think with me, do as yon please, for I well know 
what will happen." 

Neverthdess, as Pero Ghmqalvez was obstipate, he ordered 
the ship’s course to be kept as before towards land and the 
others kept to the same course; and when the midnight 
watch was just begun the ship of Diogo de Helo, which 
was in advance of the others, fired a gun, and all were 
awakened. Afonso Dalboqn^ue ordered the lead to be 
oast at once, and they found themsdves in four &thoms of 
water, as though they were close in to shore. As his own 
diip answered her helm very well, he ran very quickly to 



AVOKBO DALBOQniBQUB. 


215 


the tiller, and th^ all tamed roond to the seaward in a 
direct line as well as they conld ; and he called Pero Oon* 
qalvez. and said to him : — " I am the one who ought to 
throw my chart and compasses into the sea, for I trusted to 
your kuowledge atid 9ot to my own; now from hence- 
forward look well to what you do, and do not be wishing that 
our Lord should perform a mirade for us in delivermg us 
from the danger to which we were exposed/’ And when 
the ship of Diogo de Melo made the signal, there was a 
large bank of rock whidi the men-at-arms who were on 
the look out in the bow heard, with the sea breaking over it, 
and they called out to the mariners and asked them if it was 
land that they could hear, and in this doubt they remained, 
some inclining one way and some another, until at last th^ 
saw it was shallow water. So all that night they steered 
out to sea, and as soon as it was morning, th^ stood to 
the land again and made their way straight to Gape Besal- 
gate. And, while they were prosecuting their voyage in 
this course, Afonso Dalboqnerque held a council with the 
captains, and told them all to get ready with their armed 
forces^ for it was his intention, at whatever hour of the day 
he arrived at Calayate, to attack the city and destroy it 
before any assistanoe could be rendered to it ; and as soon 
as th^ came in sight of land all armed themselves, thinking 
that they would arrive that same day, but as the wind 
dropped they cast anchor and remained where th^ were 
night, and on the following morning they set sail and 
nAgt. andior in the harbour. As soon as he had anchored, 
Afonso Dalboqnerque sent D. Antonio de Noronha, his 
nephew, in the Jhuta, to the city, to see what people there 
were collected on the beach, and what ships there were in the 
harbour. When D. Antonio arrived dose to the shore, an 
ahnodia with a few Moors come up alongside of tiie fitgta, 
and brought four she-goats, and two baskets of lemons, and 
two more of pomegranates, their object being to find out 



216 


GOMMENTABUB OF 


who was the chief captain of these ships, for they were 
afraid lest it should be the great Afonso Dalboquerqne. 
D. Antonio came with the almadia on board the flagship 
and found all the people already armed and ready to attack 
the city ; and the Moor who brought the present^ when he 
saw our men in such a warlike attitude^ became veiy 
downcast. Afonso Dalboquerque inquired of him who the 
captain of the city was, and what men he had to garrison 
it, and the Moor told him that Xarafadin^ was the captain, 
servant of Cogeatar, and very intimate with him, and that 
there were about two hundred bowmen as garrison. And, 
because while in Ormuz he had much knowledge about this 
Xarafadin, he sent D. Antonio to land, to inform him that 
the chief captain of the fleet had sent him to beg him 
earnestly that he would be pleased to go on board his own 
ship, warning him not to tell him who the captain was. 
So D. Antonio came to land and found Xarafisdin on horse- 
back on the beach with some Moors in his company ; and 
he asked him after those whom he had sent in the almadia 
to the chief captain, and who the captain was, and whence 
they had come. D. Antonio told him that the Moors were 
Waiting in the chief captain^s ship for a present which he in- 
tended to give them, and they would soon come back, and 
that those ships came from Portugal by order of the king 
to assist another of his captains, who was cruising about 
that coast, called Afonso Dalboquerque, and that the chief 
captain of these ships had sent to desire that he would be 
pleased to pay him a visit, for it was veiy important that 
they should confer together. Xarafadin replied to him, 
that he would not go to his ship, but if he required any- 
thing from the city he might come to land with perfect 
safety. 

^ Probably the equivalent of the Arabic Sharqf ed-deen. 



AFONSO DALBOQUBBQUE. 


217 


CHAPTER LVIII. 

How the great Afonso Dalboqnerqne proceeded to attack the city of 

Calayate, and destroyed it, and what took place there afterwards. 

On the return of D. Antonio with this reply^ the great 
Afonso Dalboquerqne commanded all the men to embark 
in the boats, and in the fusta, and permitted Francisco de 
Tavora to command his own ship’s company for that par- 
ticular day, to which indeed he had already appointed as 
captaip, Diniz Fernandes, as chief mate, Diogo de Melo, 
and Martim Coelho, who had already Afonso Dalboquerqne’s 
commission. When they were ready they came on board the 
flagship to set out thence altogether ; and the people of the 
city, seeing chat the almadia did not return, and that our 
boats were collecting themselves together with the intention 
of going to land, began to take refuge in large numbers in 
the mountains. Afonso Dalboquerqne let the Moors of the 
almadia go on their parole, and stood in straight for shore 
with all his people, and told Martim Coelho and Francisco 
de Tavora, that as soon as they disembarked they were to 
proceed at once to attack the city on the side near the 
mosque, which was close to the sea, while he with the rest 
of the men would enter by the other end. 

And having arrived at the shore with this plan in view, 
our men began to Are with their guns, which they carried 
in the boats, to scatter the Moors who were stationed on 
the beach ; and when they found themselves harassed by 
our artillery, they fled away in a body as quickly as they 
could to the city. Afonso Dalboquerqne, now that the 
intention of the Moors had made him alter his original 
design, as soon as he disembarked, with all the forces 
united, entered the city along with the enemy in great 
confusion, passing through the gates into the inner part, 
and pursuing them through the streets until he had driven 



218 


C0MM1NTABIB8 OF 


them out; and some who attempted to make a stand 
before our men were killed immediately there^ and in this 
fight Payo Pereira and Diogo Camacho were wounded with 
arrows, as were also some other soldiers. 

Having left the city, the Moors rallied about the distance 
of a cannon shot from the walls, and Afonso Dalboquerque, 
being anxious lest they should return and attack him be- 
cause of the fewness of his men, ordered the captains to 
guard the gates of the city, and not permit our men to sack 
it, nor yet break their ranks until he should pve his per- 
mission for them to do so, and idl that night he patrolled 
the city from time to time with many men. When Xarafa- 
din perceived that our men were so few in number (being 
ashamed of the feeble resistance he had made), he collected 
together three hundred Moors and came on to attack us. 
As soon as Afonso Dalboquerque saw what his intentions 
were, he sent word to the captains not to fall upon them, 
but suffer them to come up to the walls ; and as soon as 
they were enticed up, he fell upon them with all his forces 
and put them to fiight along a mountain range, and our 
crossbowmen and musketeers followed after them in pursuit 
and wounded many, and then returned and rallied. Xara- 
fadin no sooner perceived that he was hard pressed by our 
musketeers, than he turned to rally the Moors and em- 
bodied himsdf with them ; and Afonso Dalboquerque, to pre- 
vent them returning to attack him, sent down to the ship for 
four cannon and placed them upon the walls, and began to 
fire upon them. When Xarafadin saw the cannon, and that 
our men ^d guarded and defended the dty for three days 
already, as if they had a mind to fortify themselves therein, 
and to sustain a siege, he withdrew to the mountains with 
all his army, and remained there until he could find out 
our intentions. 

As soon as Afonso Dalboquerque found himself relieved 
from the attacks of the Moors, he gave orders to Diogo de 



AFONSO DALBOQUSBQUE. 


219 


Melo^ and D. Afonso de Noronha^ to watch the gates of the 
city that led to the mountains^ while he himself with Martim 
Coelho and a hundred men stationed themselves at the other 
gate which led to the beach, and he also ordered a look out 
to be placed in the tower of the mosqne, to keep watch 
from thence upon the movements of the Moors. When the 
city had been disposed in this order he gave permission to 
all the remaining men to sack it; and after it had been 
sacked he ordered Francisco de Tavora to cause all those men 
to transport all the provisions and clothes they had seized to 
the ships. 

The Xarafadin, upon perceiving that our- men were en- 
gaged in removing the spoils they had taken, thinking also 
that they were all disbanded, came down from the moun- 
tains with five hundred men, and set to work to attack 
the gate where D. Antonio de Noronha and Diogo de Melo 
were stationedy and fought so fiercely with them that he 
got in by .sheer force, and they proceeded to retire through 
some narrow streets in order to make in them a better 
stand against the superior number of the Moors. Directly 
the Xarafadin had forced an entry into the city, he divided 
his army into two batallions in order thereby to enclose 
our men; and Don Antonio and Diogo de Melo, seeing the 
Moors disposing themselves so as to cut off the retreat, 
shouted out to their men to wheel round. The sentiy also 
who was stationed on the tower, when he saw the strait our 
men were in, began to shout out to our people that they 
must hasten up, for the Moors had entered the city ; and 
Afonso Dalboquerque, hearing the sentry^s shouts, pro- 
ceeded with iJl speed to that part where our men were 
fighting. D. Antonio and Diogo de Melo, however, with 
their company which they had already rallied, turned upon 
the Moors, and attacked them at close quarters with such 
spirit, that by the time the vanguard of Afonso Dalbo- 
quertiue's company came up with them our men were on the 



220 


COMMENTABIEB OF 


point of issuing out from the narrow streets in battle with 
the Moors^ and from that pointy np to the gate by which 
they had entered^ they kept on pursuing them, and there 
killed many Moors, and took many arms which those who 
fled threw down in order to be less encumbered and to be 
the easier able to effect their escape. 

As soon as Afonso Dalboquerque came up with them, and 
saw so many Moors defeated by so few men as there were 
in the company of D. Antonio and Diogo de Melo, he gave 
many thanks to our Lord for the great victory he had given 
us, and told them all when they were assembled together, 
that this indeed seemed the work of Portuguese cavaliers, 
and that the captains who had deserted him' ought to be 
well ashamed at not participating in such a deed as this, 
when they came to know of the slaughter they had made, 
while the enemy were incomparably more numerous. 
Upon their defeat and expulsion from the city all the 
Moors drew up in view of our men, looking very sad 
(like men who had experienced a great loss), and among 
them stood Pedreanes Lamprea (one of the renegades who 
had deserted at Ormuz), with a helmet on his head, having 
escaped the day the city was entered, for they had not 
recognised him. In this action there were present D. 
Antonio de Noronha, Diogo de Melo, Aires de Sousa, 
Duarte de Melo, Pero Dalpoen, Lisuarte de Freitas, An- 
tonio de Liz, Antonio Vogado, Lourenfo da Silva, Antonio 
da Costa, Femfto Vaz, and Joflo Teixeim, all honourable 
men, and of good family, and Sim&o Velho, Nuno Vaz de 
Castelo-branco, Antonio de S&, James Teixeira, and Ber- 
tolameu Pessoa, servants of " Mestre Sanctii^o,^' and Jorge 
Doria, Gentleman of the hang’s chamber, and Lopo Alvarez, 
and Martim Vaz, the constable's servants. All these men 
had their lances and swords dripping with blood, witnesses 
of what each one of them had done that day. 

So Afonso Didboquerque remained there that night with 



AFONSO DALBOQUKBQUB. 


221 


all the men, two hundred and thirty Portuguese, and he 
ordered tiie captains each one to fortify himself in the 
houses he occupied, and to hold the boats ready equipped 
close at hand, and for no attack which the Moors might 
make upon them in the night were they to sally forth until 
it was broad daylight. And in this order they remained 
all night watching the city ; and when it was morning he 
ordered sentries to be posted, and the men began to carry 
off the proyisions and all the clothes which they had seized. 
As soon as all was collected Afonso Dalboquerque massed 
his men, and went down to the beach, and ordered fire to 
be laid to all the principal houses of the oily, for in them 
the Moors had the greater portion of their supplies ; and 
he also ordered the mosque to be fired, which the Moors 
took much to heart, for it was a very large building with 
seven naves, all lined with tiles, and containing much por> 
oelain fastened upon the walls, and at the entrance to the 
gate a very large nave made with arcading, and above 
these was, as it were, a terrace looking towards the sea, all 
covered with tiles ; the gates and roof of the mosqne were 
aU of daborate masonry. And when it was set on fire it 
all fell to the ground, without anything remaining in it 
which was not burned. 

They burned there twenly-seven ships, large and small, 
which lay in the harbour waiting for cargoes in order to 
sail away to different parts. When all this was done, Afonso 
Dalboqnerqne ordmed them to out off the ears and noses of 
all the Moors whom they had captured, and left them on the 
diore, and went on board the boats and proceeded to the 
ships, giving many thanks to onrLord for Ae fovonr he had 
diown him in giving him snoh a dfy gained without danger 
to onr men with so small a force. 



222 


OOXliSNTABlBS OF 


CHAPTER LIX. 

Of the news which the Moor, who brought the gift, related to the great 
AfoiuK) Dalboquerque, concerning India : and how he sailed from 
Calayate to the city of Ormuz, and what took place with Gogeatar. 

On his arrival at the ship^ Afonso Dalboqnerqne ordered 
before him the Moor who had brought him the present^ and 
this man was very terrified both at the destruction which 
he had beheld done to his city, and also at not knowing 
what would become of hiitaself and the others. And when 
he had him before him he inquired of him what news there 
was from India, and what state Ormuz was in, and what 
men there were there, and if the king had ordered anything 
to be done to the fortress which he had left just commenced. 
The Moor told him that Cogeatar had received certain 
information that the Portuguese fleet had fought in 
Chaul^ with Mirocen, Captain of the Sultan of Cairo, and 
Meliquiaz, Captain of Din, had assisted the latter with all 
his fleet to take a ship, and that they had killed the chief 
captain of the fleet, and that Ormuz was in great want of 
provisions, for no rice nor com had come into it from- the 
interior for two years. He Baid,.too, that the Bustazes had re- 
belled against the king, and gone away with all their people, 
because Cogeatar had put out the eyes of one of their 
principal captains who was called Nagaradin, and ordered 
another called Tajadin to be cast into the sea. And that 
the sons of Bexnordim, goaM of the city, were banished 
from the kingdom, and he (Cogeatar) had taken from suu- 
diy merchants their goods, and had imprisoned Alma^a (a 
very favourite captain of his own) because he was implicated 
in a conspiracy for patting him to death on account of the 
destruction and death of the people which had taken place 

> Chowal, 18 deg. 35 min. N., 72 deg. 67 min. £., on the coast of the 
Bombay Presidency. See plans in Sloan. MS. 197, f. 230. 



AFONSO DALBOQUERQUE. 


223 


in the kingdom through his fault. And that he had made 
the Christians who had fled from the Portuguese turn 
Moors, and given them good marriages, and treated them 
very well for they had made him some very good metal 
cannons. And that in the fortress he had not done anything 
more than raise the principal tower and roof it over, and 
wall up the gate which led to the se.' , and open another 
from the inner ^ide of the terrace of the king^s palace. And 
that in the city there was a great want of water, for the 
ships which transported it had been all burned in the late 
war, and on this account Cogeatar had ordered Xarafadin, 
his servant, to overhaul all that coast, and bring him all 
the pouraos he could find for the service of the city. And 
that Cogeatar had information that the captains, who had 
deserted the Portuguese before Ormuz, were at Cochim, and 
had been very favourably received by the viceroy, and that 
in his opinion if he went to Ormuz with that fleet, con- 
sidering the great need the city was in, it could not hold 
out for more than two months before it would surrender. 

After Afonso Dalboquerque had heard this news, ho gave 
permission for the Moor to return and take his companions 
with him and the present he had brought, for it was not 
his custom to receive anything from people with whom 
he was at war; and he desired him to excuse him for having 
detained him, saying that if he had done so it was in order 
that he might not go and give information to the captain 
how he found him prepared to attack the city, and that the 
city's destruction was owing to the fault of the governors 
of the land, for they had failed in executing the agreement 
which he had made with them when he passed by this 
place on his way to Ormuz, as they might see by the royal 
passport which he had given them in the name of the King 
of Portugal, his master. He ordered also the factor to give 
him two thousand faluzed^ and some stuffs, and to the rowers 

> FalSf Arab. (cf. ^AAir, Du Cqnge)^ a small copper coin. 



224 


COMMENTARIES OF 


five hundred^ and so they went away quite content. As 
soon as Afonso Dalboquerque had taken his leave of the 
Moor he ordered the captains to be convened^ and gave 
them an account of all that had passed with him^ and told 
them how he intended, in consequence of the leaky state of 
the Oime and the Bey Qrande, to steer away for India, and 
desired their opinion as to what he should do. All the 
captains were unanimously of opinion that if Ormuz was in 
such a necessitous condition as the Moor had told him, he 
ought to go and reconnoitre the place, for if it proved correct 
there was no doubt but that the king, on his arrival, would 
revert to the agreement which had been made, and there 
would then be a place and an opportunity for repairing 
his ships, and for providing the fortress of Qocotora with 
supplies. 

He considered the advice of the captains was very good, 
and bade them return to their ships and make ready to sail 
away on the following day ; and when morning came they 
weighed anchor, and sailed along the coast, and came to 
anchor at a harbour called Tenij, and remained there for 
two days taking water at a large river which ran between 
two mountain ranges, jutting out, which formed a large 
lake close to the sea shore, idl surrounded with palms and 
many other trees. And after having taken water they set 
sail, and without touching land again proceeded to cast an 
anchor all together opposite the city of Ormuz. Afonso 
Dalboquerque ordered all the captains to range themselves 
in such order as to effectually prevent any help of provisions 
and people from entering the dly, since he intended not to 
stir thence until the city, surrendered, provided the ships 
did not make so much water as to cause him to alter his 
plan. When Cogeatar perceived our fleet, he issued imme- 
diate orders to clear the city of all the noncombatants, and 
to conduct them to the side of the main land, as well as all 
the paraos and vessels which he had for their use, in order 



AFONSO DALBOQUEBQUE. 


225 


that they might not be burned. Afonso Dalboquerque, being 
desirous of knowing the disposition in which Cogeatar had 
put the city^ ordered the captains to endeavour to capture 
some one who knew the native tongue. And by means of 
a Moor^ who was caught while fishing one night in an 
almadia, he learned that Cogeatar had constructed two very 
strong bulwarks on his fortress^ with much artillery placed 
within themj and that five days before there had arrived 
at Ormuz two men and a Moor^ who h&d escaped to him out 
of the ships in Galayate, and they had related to him the 
destruction of the city, whereat the king was much annoyed ; 
and that these men had told him that the two captains who 
had accompanied him from Qocotora, had desired to go to 
the Viceroy in India, but he had brought them by force, 
and that the ships leaked so much that he would be obliged 
to discontinue the war, and make his way to India, and 
that the fleet contained very few people, and these were 
with him very much against their will, and in Portugal 
there was so much pestilence and hunger, that their king 
could not send him any assistance of men or ships that year; 
and that when Cogeatar knew of all this, he had ordered 
every native to procure a bow, a shield, and a sword, and 
provision of water for a month, and as he could not rely 
upon the people he had the keys of all the cisterns there 
were in the country ; and that water was so dear at Ormuz, 
that ajar of it which in times of peace was worth ten pieces 
of money was now worth two hundred. 


CHAPTER LX. 

How a Moor put off from land in an almadia and went on board Mar- 
tim Coelho’s ship with two letters for the great Afonso Dalboquer- 
que, without saying who had sent them, and of farther proceedings. 

Now that the great Afonso Dalboquerque had obtained 
this information of the state in which affairs at Ormuz were 



226 


COMMSNTABIBS 0 ¥ 


situated^ lie remained just wliere he was without sending 
any one to land, waiting for Cogeatar to make up his mind ; 
and after three days’ time two Moors together came out of 
our fortress and made signs with a flag. Afonso Dalbo- 
querque ordered another to be hoisted at the yardarm of 
his ship and signals to be made to them to come on board, 
but they would not come, and on the following day they did 
just the same. And when the native Moors saw that they 
made no reply, they sent a Moorish fisherman in an almadia 
on board the ship of Martim Goelho, which was stationed 
on the other side of the city in the western harbour, with 
two letters, one from Cogeatar to Afonso Dalboquerque, 
and the other from the Viceroy to Cogeatar. 

The letter for Afonso Dalboquerque was as follows : — 

"Chief Captain,— Know thou that the Viceroy has written 
a letter for thee and for all the Portuguese captains, that 
ye make not any entry into the kingdom, islands, and lands 
of Ormuz; the same letter I have sent to thee, and thou 
hast not obeyed it, nor done what he commands ; and he 
has written another letter to the king, Geifadin, sealed with 
the King of PortngaVs seals, and, for greater security, 
Gaspar, the interpreter, and the company, came to the 
beach and beheld the letter bearing the king’s seal, and 
gave credence to the seal of their king, saying that it had a 
large quantity of red wax; now to this seal of thy king 
thou hast paid no attention, desiring, as it would seem, the 
destruction of the kingdom. Other two letters has he 
written in Persian, the one to the king, the other to me ; 
both I send thee ; read them, and return them to me, since 
thou carest nought for the commandment and seal of thy 
king. Cogeamir, whom the Viceroy has sent, and other 
people from Cananor, who are staying here, are surprised 
at all these things : and I shall write them all down, and 
shall despatch them in a small shallop^ that the Vice- 

^ Jelua, a small vessel used in the Red Sea. Arabic djdba, — Engel- 

mann^ p. 276. 



AfONSO DALBOQUEBQUE. 227 

roy may know that thou art a traitor to the King of Portu- 
gal.^' 


The Viceroy's Letter to Cooeatab. 

O, peerless^ nobly-born one, of good fortune, principal 
commander, universal protector, great lord, and captain 
over all Alguazils and captains, most nearly allied of all to 
the dignity of king, acceptable to the Most High of all, per- 
fect Lord Ataa ! ' May God augment thy dignity I 'fhia 
thy friend, D. Francisco Dalmoida, Viceroy, sendeth sub- 
mission, and offereth to kiss thy hands. It is good that 
there be such friendship between us, that thou mayest send 
a present every year to the king. I have released Negoda- 
quiQar^ with a hundred men of thy kingdom, all of whom I 
had captive, and thou wilt hear of it from them upon their 
arrival before thee : and ^hd^ four ships which have come 
thence have told me that thou hast acted in all respects as 
a king should act, and hast not erred in any way, and after- 
wards the captain began to alter it all ; and when the four 
ships perceived that the captain was in the wrong, they 
made their way to me, while he proceeded to Qocotora, 
whom I also shall chastise as the king shall appoint, that 
he may learn that wheresoever he shall receive honour, and 
give a writing on the king's behalf, he ought not to alter 
it, for the King of Portugal is not a liar, and it is necessaiy 
that his captain should not depart from his commands; but 
as he has departed from them, he shall receive his reward. 
The four ships say that they are not responsible for the 
war, but that the fault is on the captain's side. The first 
agreement that was made we will not retract, and thy friend- 

* This word is evidently a misprint in the editions for Atar ; and the 
paJtBse ** Zard Atar^' is here used as the translation of Opffeatar**^ Le., 
Lord or Master. ^*AttSr*\ a proper name, 
s The first part of this word rqiresents the Aiabio and Persian Nd~ 
kkoda^ ca;stai]i of a ship ; the latter part la a proper name. 

q2 



228 


COHVEKTABIES OF 


ship with the King of Portugal is in this statOj as is also 
that of every one who is similarly minded. It is necessaiy, 
when thou receivest this letter^ that thou come to me^ to 
the end that I may know of it, if notj thou shall know of 
it. But the four shipsj when they arrived here^ brought 
many Moors^ both old and young ; yet I liberated them all 
because of the friendship we hold towards thee : and it is 
necessary that iJl the 'ships which desire to approach these 
parts take courage and be not dismayed^ for if a single 
hair of them be injured^ I shall become a traitor to the 
King of Portugal. Send quickly a ship with thy letters^ 
for I am waiting for this, and there is nothing remaining 
to say, except that NegodaxemeQadin^ kisses thy feet. He 
will soon be with thee, he knows somewhat about all this, 
thou must believe what he says, and there must not be 
any doubt in what he will do in conjunction with thee : he 
will do whatsoever thou wishest. I send thee seven letters 
in Portngfuese for the ships which may come and go, and 
one under the seal of the King of Portugal; put thy 
trust in it : I write no more than this : peace and greet- 
ing." 

And to the same eflEect came the other letter for the king 
Ceifadin,^ and there was no difference between them, only 
where the one ^'kissed the hands of Cogeatar", the other 
''kissed the king's feet". 

Bbplt of thb great Afonso Dalboquerque to 

COGEATAR. 

" I have seen a letter which came to me from this city, 
but it does not state who sends it to me ; my answer to it 

1 This is the Portugaeae rendering of Nakhoda SKems-aUdin^ or ^^Sun 
of (he Fai(h'\ The same name (combined with the title of Coje, i.e., 
Khojah), Coje-Cemegadin, ocean in Lafitau, p. 338, in a.d. 1544. 

■ For Sei/-al-dfn^ or “8'word of the Failh*\ 



AFONSO DALBOQUERQUE. 


229 


is, that I obey the letter and command of the Viceroy. 
Now^ as in this letter I am ordered^ in the event of the 
fifteen thousand xerajins of tribute not being paid over to 
me at the stipulated time, to do as shiJI appear best to me, 
and most serviceable to the interest of the king, I declare 
that I squire thee, on the behalf of the said lord king 
and of die Viceroy of India, to pay them at the time which 
he commands; for I shall not stir hence until thou hast paid 
me, or until orders shall come from the Viceroy, command- 
ing me to do otherwise. . I do not make war upon thee, nor 
do I shoot upon thee with arrows and cannons as thy people 
have done upon me. These two letters, which have reached 
me, written in Persian, I dp not believe are from the Vice- 
roy, for they have not his signature; as for my letters 
which have my signature, take great care of them, for I 
shr^l not repudiate them at thy hands, as thou dost thine, 
and to this end omittest to sign them.^^ 

When Cogeatar perceived Afonso Dalboquerque made a 
specific claim iq>on him, he wrote this following letter to 
him, and signed it : — 

Chief captain Afonso Dalboquerque, with respect to 
that which thou hast written to me about, viz., that the two 
letters in Persian were not from the Viceroy, for they did 
not bear his signature, thou shalt know this : — The person 
who brought them is present, and I could not write of my 
own accord a letter in the name of the Viceroy. Since thou 
dost not believe them, return them to me, and I will send 
him an answer, and the letter which is in thy hand-writing 
with the Viceroy’s signature. If the one in Persian is not 
his, whose is the other ? This is nonsense that you say. 
With respect to the fifteen thousand xerafins, in the time of 
the re-establishing of the population of the kingdom, and 
when the maritime commerce is flourishing, it may be pos- 
sible to pay something, but just now it is but one year since 
thou madest this destruction upon it, and wentest away 



230 


COMMENTABIE8 OT 


until nowj so that there has been no opportunity for obtain- 
ing it. When an opportunity was just presenting itself^ thou 
hast again appeared before us and this news was reported 
everywhere^ so that not a ship comes to trade with us. 
Thou verily desirest the destruction, not the reconstruction 
of this kingdom. Calayate^ which is the last city left to the 
kingdom^ thou hast sacked and destroyed^ and carried away 
thence a hundred thousand xerafins and more ; a hundred 
thousand xerafins make a good set-off against fifteen thou- 
sand ; of all this destruction I intend to acquaint the Vice- 
roy. 

For what thou has written^ that thou wouldst not make 
war nor fire upon us^ 1 do not thank thee for it ; for what 
God willeth^ that must come to pass: as for saying that 
thou wouldst not depart, and that thou boldest the sea, if 
thou profitest by remaining, remain by all means : in Writ- 
ing this, I write no evil ; if your people read badly, this is 
another question. The Yiceroy^s letter, with thy hand- 
writing, and with the king's seal, as thou hast readers from 
the king, order them to read them, that they may know 
the truth and the falseness. Bespecting the four ships, of 
which thou hast written, that they fled away and acted 
treasonably, they have gone to the Viceroy, and behaved 
loyally in going to their captain, and performed their king's 
command, for they were witnesses that thou didst desire 
to destroy the kingdom, and all thy people are angered 
against thee ; for if it were not so, they would not have 
combined at Calayate to speak ill of thee, neither would 
they have fled to the high ^ound, to the Arabians, if thou 
hadst been true and friendly to them. It is now a year 
since thou tookest tribute; then thou wentest away at 
once ; but thou wast here five months before the war broke 
out. Whensoever I said to thee, thou oughtest to go, thou 
never wonldest go, but didst commence hostilities. Now, 
I address myself to the Viceroy ; whatever may take place. 



AFONSO DALBOQUEBQUE. 


231 


to him I intend to relate it ; for he, though absent, is my 
friend; but thou, who wast present here, and highly 
honoured by the king, yet at last becamest my enemy and 
didst not keep thy word, nor thy agreement, neither didst 
thou act as a father with his son ; and now thou cruisest 
with thy boats along the waterside, not permitting people 
to enter with what God has provided for us. In men, in 
supplies, and in arms, we have no deficiency, and if thou 
dost not believe it, send a man who may see everything. I 
am not a liar. The messenger need not fear anything. My 
word is my bond ; and in that thou sayest that thou dost 
not know who writeth to thee, my name is my signature, 
and hereto I have set my seal and signature/^ 

I have given the translation of these letters here that it 
may clearly appear how much the Viceroy laboured to 
render futile all that the great Afonso Dalboquerque did, 
although there was much reason for him to give him every 
assistance, for he was the Viceroy of India. 

Or THE Reply whicj^ the gbeat Afonso Dalboquebque 

SENT TO COOEATAB. 

^'Honoured Cogeatar, — I was much pleased to know that 
it was thou who wrotest to me, and I have thoroughly con- 
sidered this letter thou hast sent me : and in respect to the 
two letters in Persian which the Viceroy has sent thee, and 
which thou hast forwarded me, I for my part never ex- 
pected that the Lord Viceroy would give so much credit to 
some captains who deserted me in the war, and over whom 
I had as much authority as he has over those whom he has 
with him ; and if thou desirest proof, I will send it thee, 
and then thou shalt know whether they have worked treason 
or not. I am well aware what kind of things they told 
thee, and how they procured thy rebellion against me, and 
planned that thou shouldest not restore me my men, on 



232 


COMMDNTARIBS OF 


which all the peace and friendship between us was staked. 
These fugitives would not have fetched more than five 
xerajina each if they had been sold in the market-place of 
Ormuz ; while I left for thee twenty servants of the king 
in the factory^ under thy power and obedience^ as well as 
the factory of the king^ which was worth two hundred thou- 
sand doubloons. These thou mightest have taken from 
me without war if thou hadst wished^ after my departure^ 
hadst thou not taken from me these four fugitives before 
my very eyes, in or^der thereby to commence warfare^ and 
rise up against me ; and if thou hadst cared for them^ thou 
wouldst not have confessed that thou hadst them^ neither 
wouldst thou have said that thou wouldst restore them to 
me^ neither wouldst thou have shown them to me; for hadst 
thou said that thou knewest nought of them, I should 
have then had no reason for making war upon thee. But 
what kind of obedience was that which thou hadst signed 
and sworn to the king, my master, and to his captains, if 
thou couldst yet take from me my people ? and who could 
expect that thou wouldst pay him fifteen thousand xerafins, 
if thou tookest from him four runaways that were not worth 
ten 7 Thou art a captain, and therefore knowest how impe- 
rative it is upon such to give a good account of the men 
entrusted to them. I well know that my captains made 
thee do this, and thou shalt see them beheaded in the public 
square of Ormuz, for the King of Portugal, my master, has 
not conquered the Indies and whatever other places he has 
subdued, except by his captains prosecuting the war with 
their chief captain, and not working treason against him ; 
and because Portuguese never yet so acted, thou shalt see 
what I say. 

And furthermore, in regard to the complaints which the 
Lord Viceroy makes against me in the two Persian letters 
(if they be true), taking as well done the actions of my cap- 
tains, he ought to have remembered that I am the Captain- 



AFONSO DALBOQUERQUE. 


233 


General of the fleet of the king my master^ and that the 
tribute^ which he now sends to beg of you with honeyed 
words and high-sounding letters^ this tribute I have made 
thee pay with my sword in hand^ and thou thyself art hereof 
a true witness^ for thou dost confess as much in the con- 
tracting papers^ made between me and thy king^ and on 
this account I trust in God that I shall not stir hence with- 
out the tribute, inasmuch as the viceroy so orders in his 
letter ; because thou knowest that if I had not received this 
letter here^ I should not have ventured to demand tribute 
of thee^ but only my men (on whose account I beg^an the 
war upon thee^ by the advice of the captainSj cavaliers^ and 
servants of the king in my fleets and of this even now I do 
not repent)^ and because thou boldest as leal and true the 
captains who deserted me in the war and fled from me^ for 
all that they were minded as far as thou wert concerned to 
kill for thee those who were within thy house and the 
house which I constructed^ and which the captains led thee 
to suppose was for thy destruction^ is this fleets wherein I 
now am^ and that which I made was for thy protection^ for 
in times such as these (and there are many such as these in 
Ormuz) there is no reason that the men and factory of the 
king should be at the disposal of any who may conquer 
them, who would not indeed have been attacked^ if it had 
been completed. As to what thou dost allege that my peo- 
ple are angry with me, and fly from me, when thou shalt 
see taking refuge with thee an honourable man, and a ser- 
vant of the king, then believe this, but not two runaways^ 
who escaped from prison, one of whom I had a good mind 
to sentence to the loss of his hands, and the other had in- 
curred a flogging at the hands of the quarter-master, all the 
four whom thou hast deceived with specious words, in whom 
thou believedst ell thy salvation was centred, these very 
men, to whom thou dost give such credence, were the be- 
ginning of all thy destruction, and I hope to God that they 
will not compass it. 



234 


COMXINTABIES OE 


And as for what thou allegest^ saying that I ought to 
have remained in peace and friendship for a year^ and haying 
received the tribute gone away directly, thou well knowest 
that I always endeavoured to repair my fleet, and was wait- 
ing for the season and trade wind, when the Straits of Meca 
can be navigated^ which is at the commencement of the 
Bamad&o,^ for it was thither that the king commanded me 
to proceed^ although I never divulged it to thee, nor to the 
captains nor to any one whomsoever, for it is the usual cus- 
tom with chief captains to keep their instructions secret^ that 
their enemies may not come to know what they intend to 
do, for if I had then mentioned the route I intended to 
take, in a few days Adem and Jud&^ would have been fore- 
warned that I was on my way against them, according to the 
instructions given to me by the king, and with this end in 
view, I constructed the brigantine, which thou hast burned 
for me, for it was much wanted for such an expedition. 
And furthermore, if thou wilt be so good as to bear it in 
mind, the Noradin required of me on the king’s behalf and 
on thine, that I would not depart thence, for the ships from 
MeQar were coming, and might possibly seize the city and 
hold it in possession ; but I sent back word to him, that by 
the agreement 1 had made I was under the obligation to 
defend his kingdom, and that it only remained for the king 
to mention what he would have me to do. 

^'And to proceed yet further, what did Ormuz lose all 
the while I was stationed before her? Did the caravans 
cease to come, or did they not rather come more often F 
And the sailing ships also, if thou hadst not hindered 
them, would have come too. But on the contraiy, by 
my establishing myself here the kingdom became more 

> The XurkiBh month, of thirty days, oorreBponding to part of March 
and April, generally obaerved as a fast. 

* Jidda, or Djcddah, the port of Mecca, lat. 21 deg. 30 min. N., 
long. 39 deg. 22 'min. E. 



AFONSO OALBOQUSBQnB. 


235 


and more secure and the common people grew rich. And 
thou well knowest that after I delivered it over to thee^ 
I never meddled either in the administration of justice 
of the country, or in the government of the kingdomj 
but rather gave thee licence to order the arrest of my 
men if in the city they did not behave themselves with due 
propriety. Not a loaf was purchased without thy order, 
and if thou hadst set the price of it at a hundred xerajins, 
as much would have been paidj and so in the seed-pearl^ and 
in everything else that was bought, all was paid as thou 
didst arrange. And I ordered nothing to be made in the 
ciiy by the smith, the carpenter, the mason, the tailor, or 
by any other workman, without thy permission; wherein 
I demonstrated that I was more amenable to thy obedience 
than thou wast to mine. As for the house that I built, the 
king, and his father, and thou thyself gave me the site of 
it, and the foundation whereon I placed it, as I have proof 
of, under their signatures ; and as for the stone and the 
workmen, whereby it was constructed, thou didst give them 
to me. Many a time did I send to ask thee if thou wert con- 
tent at my building it, and thou didst answer yes. If thou 
wert not content, wherefore didst thou not say so, instead of 
taking my men from me, whereby thou hast fallen into dis- 
obedience and broken the contract 7 Yea, and as often as 
thou hast occasion to mention this war to the Viceroy, thou 
dost never tell him the reason of its commencement, which 
is a sig^ of guilt ; and befo^ such men thou hast to declare 
the whole of the affair. AH this then will go before the 
king my master, and it will not seem very much to his 
interest that thou shouldst make Moors of his Chris- 
tians. 

And in regard to thy statement that I have not kept 
the word and contract which I made with the king, nor 

■ Aljo/ar^ cf. Arab., jauhar^ johar; Pers., gauhar^ gohar;^^ jewel, 
or precious stone.— JSape/mann, p. 145 ; Eluteauj vol. i, p. 260. 



236 


COMMENTARIES OF 


dealt with him as a father with a soxij I have performed and 
maintained all that I agreed with him to do ; and^ if this is 
not so^ do thou but leave him in free liberty to govern his 
kingdom, and I engage that he will make a recognition of 
the good service I have rendered him in delivering up the 
kingdom to him after that I had gained possession of it. 
Had he been free to act^ and the kingdom governed by 
him^ thou hadst not robbed me of my men nor rebelled 
against me ; yet I hope in God yet to render him so many 
good offices, and to assist him in obtaining so many coun- 
tries in Persia (captured according to his orders, and in 
obedience to the king my lord), that he may become the most 
powerful sovereign therein, for he deserves it because of his 
goodness, and because he is come of a line of kings. Again 
with regard to thy account that thou hast many supplies, 
arms, and soldiers, and art lacking in nothing, thou verily 
hast good need of them all ; but for all these he who has 
overcome thee in thy prosperity will now also make thee do 
all that the Viceroy orders. And if thou dost not perform 
these orders, then shalt thou see whether the Portuguese 
cavaliers are disaffected with me or not, for there is not one 
among us this time who will corrupt the men^s inclinations, 
only captains who with much spirit and good will are willing 
to die with their captain-general in the service of their king. 
And thou also art well aware that I know the Bustazes are 
against thee, because thou hast put out the eyes of the best 
captain and cavalier whom the King of Ormuz had, and 
Calcocejo,^ who has many men, and whose orders in the 
land are always done, and Xeque Ale, too, are no longer 
under thy command. I know also what men thou hast with 
thee, and the intention wherewith thou hast sent Xarafadin 
to Galayate. And I am well informed where thou dost sleep, 
and what thou dost eat, and how thou dost live, and I know 
also that the house of Ormuz is upon a very weak founda- 
■ This name occurs as Caecocejo on p. 248. 



AFONSO DALBOQUEBQUE. 


237 


tioiij and must of necessity perish^ if thou dost adhere to 
this path. I require thee once, twice, and three times to 
fulfil the command of the viceroy ; and if thou hast aught 
to the contrary, show it to me and I will fulfil it entirely, 
according to the instructions of the king, my lord, given 
to me. 

"If thou write to. the viceroy, send him my letters, for to 
this end I send thee this one in Portuguese, signed and 
sealed with my signet; for when he hears both sides 
he will pronounce a better sentence. Yet again I tell thee 
that the cause of the war that has begun between me and 
thee is yet alive, and that no one from envy can put me 
down and hide me, for have I not already many a time told 
thee that I was no corsair but captain-general of the King 
of Portugal, an old man and a peaceable one, and that I 
have plenary instructions from him of which he will take 
from me account for all that I do ? And as for what thou 
dost say that thou wilt speak with the viceroy for the future, 
and that whatsoever may happen thou wilt inform him of it, 
thou dost well herein and art right ; for whenever I make 
war upon enemies it is in such a manner that it behoves 
them for their own sakes to go and beg for mercy of the 
king or of those who exercise his power. And since thou 
already hast begged mercy of him, I promise thee (unless 
thou dost comply with the order given in his letter) that 
thou shalt go yet again and beg it of him. In what is 
stated in the Persian letter about my not daring to go to 
him, but that I went indeed to Qocotora, know of certainty 
that I have fear of no one except of my king ; but on the 
contrary I tell thee that the captain who knew both how to 
obtain this kingdom, and conquer a king in battle, and 
make him tributary to the King of Portugal, will be treated 
with great honour, let him go whithersoever he will, and 
the viceroy knows that I have performed my duty in pro- 
ceeding to succour the fortress of Qocotora, as my king had 



238 


COMMENTARIES OF 


ordered mo^ and that I had not now fled^ had I not gone to 
seek for the supplies which the captains carried away from 
me when they departed^ leaving thy fleet of seventy sail 
against me^ although I commanded them to make for it and 
destroy it ; but this they would not do^ and well it was that 
it turned out soj since between thee and them there was 
such amity 


CHAPTER LXI. 

Hov 7 the great Afonso Dalboquerque recounted to the captains and 
principal men of the fleet all that had passed with Gogeatar, and 
of the message he sent him, and of the reply he made. 

After the great Afonso Dalboquerque had sent this reply 
to Gogeatar^ he ordered the captains to be summoned^ with 
all the Fidalgos and principal men of the fleet, and gave 
them an account of all that had passed with Gogeatar; and 
after having read the letter which the Viceroy had written 
to him, he said to them that he begged them, as a favour, 
to consider the affair veiy carefully, and advise him as truly 
as they could, what steps he ought to take in the matter, 
for his judgment was insufScient for the understanding of 
the mode of dealing which the Viceroy desired to have with 
him. And he explained that the Viceroy had not been con- 
tent with highly favouring the captains who had fled away 
from the war, and deserted him, permitting many insults to 
be perpetrated upon him,' for the service of the king our 
lord ; but that he even had written the letter before them 
to Gogeatar, praising him highly about his flight and return- 
ing to him the captive Moors, whom he had forwarded, 
though taken in fair war, together with many words of little 
credit to his person, and lightly esteeming his labours, as 
they had seen in this letter, all which was highly favourable 
to the Moors, but greatly to his own disadvantage. And 



AFONSO DALBOQUERQUE. 


239 


since this was so, and he had no longer any hope of the 
Yiceroy^s assisting him in this undertaking, he had made 
up his mind to have no more disputes with Oogeatar, nor 
even to demand tribute from him, but to steer for India 
and come to the point face to face with the Viceroy. The 
captains, although they were deeply moved by the contents 
of the letter, and the slight estimation in which the Vice- 
roy held Afonso Dalboquerque, yet, notwithstanding all 
this, they urged him to suffer it, and not to be put out, for 
all that he was on*the eve of the journey; and they told 
him that he ought to send a declaration to Cogeatar, and 
notify to him the orders of the Viceroy. 

Upon hearing this advice of the captains Afonso Dal- 
boquerque suppressed the anger that he felt, and sent 
word to Cogeatar by Pero Dalpoem, and Caspar Rodri- 
guez, the interpreter, that the term appointed by the 
Viceroy for the payment of the tribute if it was wished 
to avoid the war, would end eight days therefrom ; and if 
it were not paid by that time, that they would no longer 
care to demand tribute of him, but would insist on the 
return of the four Christians, whom he had taken from 
him, for the kingdom of Ormuz belonged to the King of 
Portugal, his lord, gained with his fleet, and would not be 
suffered to secede. 

Cogeatar replied to Pero Ddpoem that he might tell the 
captain-general that he must undeceive himself, for neither 
to him nor to any other person whatsoever would he 
pay tribute, even if the Viceroy himself were to order 
him to do so. And, although Afonso Dalboquerque was 
very ill pleased with this reply, yet, because it had already 
been agreed by all that he ought not to make war npon 
him nntil the stated period had elapsed, he dissembled with 
him, and set about sending D. Antonio de Noronha, his 
nephew, to the Island of Queixome in the Jmta and the 
boats, to obtain water, owing to the great need there was 



240 


COMMEKTABIES OF 


of it throughout the fleet. And as soon as it was all ready 
for them^ he set out without delay by nighty and arrived at 
the island by daybreak^ and as he was on the point of land- 
ings many people ran up to prevent him disembarking; 
but D. AntoniOs with those whom he had with him^ got to 
land by force of arms^ and dispersed the natives, and reached 
the wells, but as he found them filled with rotten fish 
which the Moors had cast into them, he returned to the 
ships without cariying back any water. 

Nevertheless, by reason of there being no supply pf 
water throughout the fleet, and as the men were already 
beginning to suffer in consequence, and as none could be 
obtained from the Island of Queixome and from Nabande 
(these were the nearest) except with a large armed force, 
for Cogeatar had placed many soldiers there on guard over 
the wells, he again dispatched D. Antonio de Noronha in 
the fiLsta and boats, without loss of time to bring back 
water from the Island of Lara, and on the following day he 
returned with the paraoa laden with it. On the arrival of 
D. Antonio, Afonso Dalboquerque sent Pero Dalpoem and 
Caspar Bodrigues, the interpreter, to land, to inform Co- 
geatar that the term of the eight days, given to him to en- 
able him to pay the tribute, was now past, and that now, 
in accordance with the warning already given, he was 
determined to do as he thought most service to the 
King of Portugal; therefore now he no longer desired 
tribute, but the men of his fleet, who had been taken from 
him, and he trusted in his friendship and in the treaty 
he had made with him when he delivered over the kingdom 
in the name of the King of Portugal, signed by the king, 
and sealed with his seal. But as for the tribute, he would 
be obliged to pay it ; for the Viceroy would send and insist 
upon it, since he would take care about this, and so much 
friendship existed between them, and he could advise the 
king to look well after the preservation of the kingdom. 



AFONSO DALBOQUERQUE. 


241 


and not seek its destruction by refusing to send back four 
runaways who would not be able to defend him from this 
attack. 

Cogeatar^ knowing that the king was not very well 
pleased with the war, desired to prevent Pero Dalpoem 
from giving him this message^ yet for dissimulation's sakc^ 
gave place to it, and desired him to go before the king. 
Upon hearing the message, the king, who was anxious 
as to what reply he should make, cast his eyes upon 
Cogeatar, and said to Pero Dalpoem that he could not 
send back the four men, for they were now become Moors, 
and the law of their faith protected them ; and after Pero 
Dalpoem had retired from the king^s presence with this 
reply, Cogeatar told him to say to the captain-general, that 
the tribute, which the Viceroy had sent to demand, had 
been well paid by the destruction he had wrought in Cala- 
yate ; and as he was constantly stationed in the harbour, 
seizing and destroying every thing that came to it, it was 
now two years since any dues had been received in the 
custom-house, and there was therefore no need of saying 
anything more. Aa for the four Christians whom he had 
sent to demand, the king had already replied upon this 
point, and if he was bent upon making war upon him be- 
cause he would not yield them up, he might do as he 
pleased, for it- would not hurt him in any way whether he 
stayed there a day, or a year, or a hundred years. He then 
summoned Cogeamir, the bearer of the Viceroy’s letters, 
and told him, in the presence of Pero Dalpoem, that he 
was not going to decline paying the tribute, but that at 
present he had no means of paying it, but yet he was the 
servant of the King of Portugal, to whom the kingdom of 
Ormuz belonged, although the captain-general desired to 
destroy it j he therefore was to remember all these things 
and repeat them to the Viceroy when he returned to him ; 
and he also told him many other lying words, full of deceit. 



242 


COMMENTARIES OF 


Pero Dalpoem mado no answer, but took his leave, and 
Cogcatar iimnaged that ho should go forth through the 
gate of the castle, where ho had ten metal pieces of ord- 
nance/ as largo and as well made as our own, and a large 
double-chamborod mortar (homharda), of the size of our 
camelosj all mounted on gun-carriages, as well as many 
other iron guns of good workmanship, which the renegades 
had made, planted upon a bulwark lately constructed there. 


CHAPTER LXII. 

Of the council which the great Afonso DallKX][uerque held with the 
captains upon the reply of Cogeatar, and what they agreed upon, 
and the message which he sent to the Kustazes by some ol their 
servants, and what further passed. 

Upon the receipt of this reply of Cogeatar, so full of 
pride, the great Afonso Dalboquerque summoned the cap- 
tains, fldalgos, masters, and pilots, and all the other people 
of the fleet, to make up their minds what to do ; and all 
having assembled on board his ship, he recounted to them 
the message which Coge.atar had sent to him through Pero 
Dalpoem, and told them the disgust he felt in his soul at 
seeing how proudly Cogeatar hafl replied to his messages, 
a thing which he had never yet done until now, and only 
now because of the slight store which he perceived the 
Viceroy sot upon him and upon all those who accompanied 
him in this war, to the service of the King of Portugal ; 
and he explained how the captains who had deserted him, 
though he had been very intimate with them, had asked 
him wliotlicr ho would make the voyage to India to save 
those ships which leaked so much, or rather continue to 
blockade the city until it surrendered ; for ho had certain 


‘ ' I'cilcoiict:.* or howitzers. 



AFONSO I&LBOQUBBQUE. 


243 


information that it was in very great need of supplies and 
water^ and that there had been great dissension among 
the inhabitants. 

The captains and all the rest of the peoplej upon all these 
representations made to them by Afonso Dalboqnerque^ 
discussed this business^ and^ having carefully weighed 
everything, agreed that on condition that the leaks in the 
ships did not increase so as to render them liable to gpreat 
risk of being unable to make the passage to India, they 
would remain there until the end of October, for until this 
time some ships might proceed thither from Portugal, on 
their arrival at ^ocotord, and this would be a great help in 
the matter. Having agreed upon this, Afonso Dalhoquer- 
que ordered the captains to set their ships in order round 
the city as before, and by night to cruise in the boats along 
the shore, each one on the watch, as chance might take 
them, to prevent any paraos from passing through the 
blockade to the city ; and they made such diligence in 
this matter that they took many which approached, laden 
with supplies, and among them three, belonging to the 
captains of the Rustazes, who sailed from a place which 
was called J&quem. 

When Afonso Dalboquerque knew that the paraoa be- 
longed to them, he ordered them to be given up, and wrote 
to them through some of their servants who were in them, 
that if they were willing with their army to assist him in 
this war, he would pay them and supply them with rations; 
and when he had driven Cogeatar out of the city, would 
give up to them the government of the kingdom. The 
servants of the Rustazes went away, and gave the letters 
to Caecocejo,^ who was the principal man amongst them ; 
and, as the way was long, they oonsumed much time about 
it ; so that when they returned with the reply, they found 

1 This name is spelled Galcooejo on p. 286. 

R. 2 



244 


COMHENTABIES OF 


Afonso Dalboqnerqne already determined to proceed to 
India. 

The Gaecocejo's reply was to the effect that he was 
highly pleased with possessing his friendshipj and he was 
then engaged in making ready himself and all his relations 
to come and serve him in the war, for all were desirous of 
becoming vassals of the King of Portugal ; and he would 
have him to kpow that as soon as he had arrived at Cala- 
yate, Cogeatar had caused them to be summoned, offering 
him many rewards, which he had, however, refused to 
accept. In addition to this reply, he sent a present of 
chickens, sheep, and pomegranates, and Afonso Dalboquor- 
que sent him another of silk stuffs, and other things of 
great price, and wrote to him, thanking him greatly for his 
intention to come, but that he was very sony that he could 
not wait for him, yet he hoped veiy shortly to return and 
take again in hand that enterprise, and then both together 
they would make war upon Ormuz. 

Having dismissed these servants of .the Bustazes, seeing 
that the water for the use of the men in the fleet (which 
was the source of more anxiety to Afonso Dalboquerque 
than anything else) was running very short in the ships, he 
ordered D. Antonio to go to the Island of Lara and fill the 
paraoa, as he had done idready some days ago. So Antonio 
set out and arrived at the island, and as he found it was 
already garrisoned with soldiers who had passed over from 
the Island of Queixome to guard the wells, he returned 
without taking in any supply. As soon as D. Antonio 
reached the fleet again, Afonso Dalboquerque made ready 
to proceed to the island in person, and sent Martim Coelho 
forward in his vessel, and he himself embarked in the fuata 
and in the boats with a large number of men, and followed 
after Martim Coelho. On arriving at the island, they dis- 
embarked, and proceeded to attack the Moors, and at once 
put them to rout, and made them quit the stations they 



AFONSO DALBOQUEBQUE. 


245 


held^ and took many camels^ ske-goats^ and cows^ and un- 
covered the wells which the Moors had closed up^ and 
loaded the paraoa and boats with water and provisions. 
When this was done, Afonso Dalboqnerque went back to 
the shipsj leaving Martim Coelho in his vessel on guard 
over the wells; and^ as long as he remained there, the 
Moors who were in the Island of Queixome did not dare 
pass over to the Island of Lara. And three days after his 
return to the ships he sent Diogo de Melo to the Island of 
Lara to tell Martim Coelho that he was to take in water, 
'and go and cast anchor off the city, where he himself was 
stationed. Diogo de Melo went away without loss of time, 
and on reaching the island told Martim Coelho what Afonso 
Dalboqnerque had ordered, so he took in water for him- 
self, and weighing, went and anchored in the place where 
Diogo de Melo was stationed. 

After Martim Coelho had taken up this new position, 
Afonso Dalboquerque ordered Pero Dalpoem and J oSo 
EstSLo to go in his ship^s skiff by night along the coast to 
see what our men (whom he had commanded to watch the 
diy in the boats) were about; and while they were rowing 
up dong the bank, a parao came close up to them, and not 
guessing what it could be, they proceeded to attack, though 
unprovided with arms, thinking that it was coming with 
supplies for the city ; and as they boarded it they were all 
wounded with arrows, and because the affair took place 
of a sudden, they were so thrown aback that the Moors had 
opportunity to save themselves in the parao. Afonso Dal- 
boquerque, thinking that it might be a stratagem of the 
renegades, who had advised Cogeatar to order archers to 
be placed on board the paraos which carried provisions to 
protect them, that very night ordered the boats, armed with 
soldiers, to take one, that be might learn from the Moors it 
would contain what this course of action proceeded from. 
And as our boats kept on going round the city all night, a 



246 


COMMENTABIES OF 


paraio with thirty archers came to close quarters with them 
and they took it without resistance^ and carried it to the place 
where Afonso Dalboquerque was stationed. And from two 
MoorSj whom he ordered to be put to the torture^ he learned 
that the widow of King CergoP had sent one hundred and 
fifty archers to the King of Ormuz^ distributed in many 
paraosj that they might come more secretly^ in order to 
assist him in the war^ and that Cogeatar had ordered a fleet 
to be built at Julfar^ to come and bum that of the Portu- 
guese> and that a Persian caravan had arrived at the port 
of Nabande^ wherein there came two captains of Xeque 
Ismael with five hundred archers^ wearing high helmets^ 
whom Cogeatar had sent for^ giving a great sum of money 
that they might help him in the war^ and these were only 
waiting for a safe passage to cross over. 


CHAPTER LXIIL 

How the great Afonao Dalboquerque uiformed Diogo de Melo of what 
news he had received concerning the fleet of Julfar, and went to 
Rabande, and fought with the captains of Xeque Ismael, and 
routed them. 

As soon as the great Afonso Dalboquerque was informed 
of this fleet which was being prepared in Julfar, he wrote 
immediately to Diogo de Melo to be upon his guard and 
keep up his communications^ lest they should fall upon him 
unawares ; and in case so many ships should come that he 
would be unable to cope with them, he was to send him 
word at once^ for he would come in person to help him. 

1 The king’s name is given as Satyol in a former chapter. 

* There are two places of the name of Jul/a, but neither seem to 
have been likely places for building a fleet ; one in 32 deg. 38 min. N., 
51 deg. 52 min. £. ; the other on the River Arazes, 38 deg. 57 min. N., 
45 deg. 37 min. E. 



AFONSO DALBOQUEBQUE. 


247 


And he told the other captains that he had news that two 
captains of the Xeque Ismael had reached Nabando^ bring- 
ing men to reinforce the King of Ormuz, they must there- 
fore make themselves ready^ for he was determined to go 
thither and fight with them ; and he ordered D. Antonio de 
Noronha to embark in his ship’s boat with a portion of the 
men^ while he^ with the remaining portion^ would go in the 
fusta. And lest the ships should be seen to be deserted by 
their companies in the sight of the city^ and lest the rene- 
gades should perceive, by the absence of the ships’ boats, 
that they were left empty (a stratagem these fellows them- 
selves knew well enough how to practise), he agreed that 
this attack should be made at night, for the moon was very 
bright, and then they could return in time, that they might 
not be missed at the ships. He also posted several men to 
guard the ships, and left two gunners in each. 

And having arranged all this, he embarked at once by 
night with all his men, and proceeded to join the other cap- 
tains, who were already prepared; then they all together 
made their way straight to Nabande, where they arrived at 
midnight. They were, however, immediately discovered, 
and they heard a shouting as of many people, and, on 
coming nearer to land, the Moors gave another ^hout, which 
seemed to proceed from a smaller number of men. Afonso 
Dalboquerque, who was in the vanguard, as he did not hear 
any noise of people, thought they had quitted the place, and 
gone away ; so he disembarked ; but as soon as he put his 
feet on the ground, such a quantity of arrows were dis- 
charged at our men, without their perceiving from what 
quarter they were attacked (for it was night), that they could 
not stand to their quarters. Yet remaining with his men 
massed together in expectation of the arrival of the boats, 
and deeming it less danger to fall upon the Moors, than to 
wait while they wounded them all, he decided that he would 
attack them ; and at this crisis the other captains came up, 



248 


COMMENTARIES OF 


and as soon as they had landed their men, he started off 
and began to enter the place. Directly the Moors caught 
sight of him, they drew themselves up in a body close to 
the mosque, and there waited, while Afonso Dalboquerque, 
just as he was, in company with his men, fell upon them, and 
attacked them with so much fury, that at the first stroke they 
slew many, and thus having made good use of their lances, 
they came to close quarters with their swords upon the Moors 
on a sandbank which was hard by the place, and they 
f ought, both one and the other side, with such vigour for a 
good space of time, that they made the sandbank so clear 
that it seemed more like the terrace of a palace than a bank 
of sand. And being in this critical position, which did not 
last very long, with the greater part of the men wounded, 
D. Antonio de Noronha came up from behind the mosque 
and fell upon the Moors, who, when they saw themselves 
out-flanked, took to flight. And just then arrived Francisco 
de Tavora, and Martim Coelho with his men, and pursued 
them for some time, disabling many of them, who, as they 
thus fled away, kept turning round to fight with our people 
and could not quite make up their mind to retreat. Afonso 
Dalboquerque, while it was still night, retained his position 
close to the mosque with his men in close order, and fear- 
ing lest those who pursued the Moors should straggle about, 
he ordered the captains to withdraw them and reinforce his 
men. And, as soon as they were united, they entered the 
place and passed up a street to attack a house wherein were 
the two captains of the Xeque Ismael, in the act of mount- 
ing their horses, with the servants, prepared for flight, and 
forcing their way in, they put every one of them to death, 
and returned immediately to the mosque, where there was 
another captain with a large body of men collected together 
to fortify themselves in it. It was, however, of no use for 
him to do so, for D. Antonio de Noronha, and Martim 
Coelho, and all the rest of the people, who followed them. 



AFONSO DALBOQUBBQUE. 


249 


proceeded to attstck the mosque^ and made an entry by 
force, and slew the captain, and all the people it contained^ 
stripping them of their arms^ and red helmets, and every- 
thing else they had, and then sallying out they began to 
sack the place. Afonso Dalboquerque, perceiving that the 
Moors of the land were beginning to assemble together, 
while he had but few men with him, for it was night, made 
his way back with the captains towards the shore, where 
the boats were stationed, that he might make use of the 
cannons if they attempted to attack him, and he ordered 
the town to be set on fire in four difierent places, and the 
drum to be beaten, that the people who were dispersed up 
and down, sacking the place, might know where he was. 
When our men heard the drum, each one made his way 
back towards that pai*t where the drum was being beaten, 
with as much treasure as he could bring away ; and when 
they had re-assembled, the Moors no longer dared to en- 
gage them, but withdrew to the opposite side of the place, 
and between ns and them there was a marshy piece of 
ground, and there they remained, without being able to ex- 
tinguish the fire in the place. 

In this affair on that day there were in company with 
Afonso Dalboquerque the following persons: — Diogo Gui- 
sado and Gaspar Machado (of the royal household), Antonio 
de Sa, Bertolameu Pereira, Nuno Yaz de Castelo-branco, 
Antonio de Liz (pages of the Master of Sanctiago), Joflo Coel- 
ho, Gon9alo Queimado, and Pero Gongalvez (chief pilot); and 
they were all wounded with arrows. And with D. Antonio 
do Noronha there were Jorge da Silveira, Francisco de 
Melo, Duarte de Sousa, Bastifto de Miranda, Antonio da 
Costa, Lisuarte de Freitas, Jofto Estflo, Nicol&o de Andrade, 
Antonio Fragoso, Pero Daipoem, Jofto Teixeira, Simfto 
Yelho, James Teixeira, Antonio Yogado, and many other 
hononrable men. And with Francisco de Tavora there 
werc> D. Jeronymo de Lima, D. Jofto (his brother), Aires 



250 


COMMENTARIES OF 


do Sousa^ Lopo Alvarez^ Martim Vaz^ Antonio Fernandes 
(page of the Count of Villa Nova), Diogo Machado Dinis 
Fernandez (master of the Oirne), and many others. And 
with Martim Coelho there were, Antonio da Silva, Christo- 
vSLo de MagalhSles (his brother), Paio Pereira, Pero de 
Sousa, Caspar Vaz, Christovao de Azevedo (bastard brother 
of Martim Coelho). And these, one and all, fought upon 
that day so valiantly, and performed such an honourable 
feat (as it was against the Persians who in those parts are 
reckoned for the bravest men in the world), that I thought 
it right for the honour of their children, to make mention 
of their names in this place. And I thoroughly believe, 
that the Persians who escaped therefrom would give a 
better report of the bravery of the Portuguese in their land, 
than that which the captains who fled away from the war 
left behind them in Ormuz. And just as much as the flight 
of our captains was a source of marvel to theXeque Ismael, 
so he very much praised this rout to which our men put 
his captains, for hereafter he tried very hardly to make 
friendly terms with Afonso Dalboquerque, and sent to visit 
him, but by the time his ambassadors had arrived at Ormuz 
Afonso had already started for India. The inhabitants of this 
place had not their wives nor their property in the place, 
for they lived in dread of what now happened to them, 
and the spoils that were taken came from those Persians 
who were stationed there, and consisted of money, clothing, 
arms, daggers mounted in gold and in silver, bows, arrows, 
and many horses, which they put to death, and they burned 
all the supplies for them, and all their munitions of war, 
which Cogeatar had stored there for transmission to Or- 
muz. 

As soon as this affibir was finished Afonso Dalboquerque 
withdrew with all his forces to the boats, and with rowing 
and sailing they laboured all the remainder of the night, so 
that they managed to reach the ships as morning dawned. 



AFONSO DALBOQUfiRQUE. 


251 


The men who had remained behind informed him that in 
the city during the whole of the night there had been a 
great disturbance, when they saw the fire at Nabande, and 
all that day was taken up in attending to the wounded, 
who were very numerous. On the following morning, 
Afonso Dalboquerque ordered Dinis Fernandez to go in the 
Rey grands to the Island of Lara, and take in water, and 
Diogo deMelo to take up this ship’s position; and when the 
anchors had been weighed and he was sailing with his fore- 
sail set, a parao came from shore, rowing with all its power 
to reach the ship. Dinis Fernandez, thinking that it was 
bringing him some message, ordered the tacks to be let go, 
and waited for it. As soon as the Moors, who were in the 
paraoj came up close to the ship, they fired a cannon at 
her. Afonso Dalboquerque, seeing the parao firing upon 
the ship, despatched with great haste in his boat D. Anto- 
nio, and Jorge da Silveira in his skiff, to go and cut off the 
return of the parao to the shore, with orders to run well in 
to the edge of the land, for it was low tide, and the artilleiy 
of the city was unable to injure them. When the Moors in 
the parao perceived that our boats pulled away from the 
ships, before they could cut them off, made for the land, and 
as our boats were now close upon them, they began to fire, 
with the artillery they carried, upon the people of the land 
who came down to the rescue, and made them keep off. 
D. Antonio and Jorge da Silveira, transported with great 
fury, wanted to land after the Moors ; but Afonso Dalbo- 
querqne came up immediately in his fusia, and made them 
withdraw, for the Moort^ who had rallied upon the alarm, 
were eight hundred archers and fifty horsemen, and our 
men were too few to attack them. And having got posses- 
sion of the parao and the cannon which the Moors carried 
in it, they returned to the ships, and Dinis Fernandez made 
his. way to the Island of Lara as he went. 



252 


COMMENTARIES OF 


CHAPTER LXIV. 

How Diogo de Melo, who was stationed at the Island of Lara, was lost, 
and how the great Afonso Dalboquerque set out for India, and what 
took place until his arrival at the island. 

While the great Afonso Dalboquerqne was waiting for 
Diogo de Melo to bring his ship to anchor where the Rey 
Qrande had been^ Duarte de Melo, his brother, arrived in 
his boat, and told him that three days before Diogo de 
Melo had gone on board a small zamhuco, which Manuel de 
Lacerda had captured laden with dates, and gone away with 
nine Portuguese and two Moors, but had never yet returned, 
nor did he know any news of them, but that the Moorish 
fleet which was fitting out at Julfar had arrived off the 
Island of Lara, and was now riding at anchor there. Afonso 
Dalboquerque, startled at this information which Duarte de 
Melo had given to him, immediately ordered D. Antonio de 
Noronha and D. Jeronymo de Lima to embark in the fusta 
and in his boat with men, and to go with Duarte de Melo, 
and see what it was that had happened. And he. wrote a 
letter to Martim Goelho, bidding him weigh anchor and 
unite with them, that together they might attack the 
Moorish fleet which wa's lying off the Island of Lara, and do 
their best to obtain some information of Diogo de Melo, 
and go to his assistance, if by some chance he might hap- 
pen to be in a place whence he could not come forth be- 
cause of the Moorish fleet. As soon as the captains had 
started, they proceeded to unite with Martim Coelho, that 
all together might attack the Moorish fleei^ which was 
lying at anchor, and this, directly it caught sight of our 
ships, weighed anchor and fled away under full sail and 
rowing. 

D. Antonio, with the other captains, started in pursuit, 
but perceiving that they could not come up with them, they 



AFONSO DALBOQUERQUE. 


253 


turned back and sailed all round the Island of Lara, to jrct 
any information they could concerning Diogo do ]Mclo, and 
in this voyage they found in the sea six dead men, and re- 
cognised them as having belonged to Ins company ; and as 
they sailed along the coast of tlio island they captured a 
small paraOy with three or four Jloors, and thereupon D. 
Antonio do Noronha parted with Duarte do Mclo, sending 
him on with this news, and bidding him take with him the 
Moors whom they had just then taken. On the arrival of 
Duarte do Mclo, Afonso Dalboqiicrquc ordered, the floors 
to be put to the torture ; and then they told him that, as 
their fleet lay at anchor off the Island of Queixomc, a small 
partto, with some Portuguese in it, came up with it, and 
their captain proceeded to attack it, and it would not 3’icld, 
so they sent it to the bottom i and as tlio Christians 
swam about in the water they killed them all, except one 
whom they took alive, and the captain sent him away at 
once to Cogeatar, and that the Portuguese boat, being 
heavily armed, sank. Afonso Dalboquon^ue was much 
grieved at this disaster, and asked Duarte dc Melo how his 
brother could have acted in such a manner, when ho had 
warned him over and over again about the fleet. Duarte 
replied, that his brother had been deceived by two Moors 
whom Manuel de Lacerda had taken captive in a zamhuco^ 
who had informed him that if he would release them, they 
would take him to a harbour where there were sundry 
paraos stationed, and he had been drawn into this trap by 
them, and given a deaf ear to all the remonstrances that 
had been made. 

When Duarte de Melo had started off with this message, 
Martim Coelho weighed anchor, and proceeded to unite 
with Dinis Fernandez, captain of the Bey Grande, which was 
lying off the Island of Queixomc, intending to wait for 
further instructions from Afonso Dalboquerque, while D. 
Antonio de Noronha remained in the vessel of Diogo dc 



254 


COMMENTARIES OF 


Melo, and Jorge da Silveira in the fusta. After haying 
taken in a supply of water, they proceeded to the city, and 
found Afonso Dalboquerque voiy much alarmed, as well by 
this disaster which had befallen Diogo de Melo, as also by 
the great leak in the Gime, which was such that thirty 
Moors, working incessantly at the pump, could hardly keep 
it under with great labour ; and in this state, so sudden a 
storm fell upon the ships, that they had like to have all 
been overset, but as it did not last very long, and the 
cables held firmly, they were saved. As soon as the storm 
was over, Afonso Dalboquerque, feeling himself without 
men, without a fleet, and but ill-assisted by the Viceroy, 
made up his mind to go to India ; and without holding any 
more communication with Cogeatar, he set sail, and steered 
for the Island of Queixome, where Martim Coelho was 
stationed, with Dinis Fernandez, to take in water there, in- 
tending thence to make his way to India; but when ho 
arrived there, as he did not see the Rey Grande, he asked 
Martim Coelho where she was. The captain replied that, 
on the last now moon, so fierce a storm had struck her, that 
they were nearly all lost, and Dinis Fernandez had let go 
the cables, and he, seeing him sailing away, had inquired of 
him whether he also should slip his cable ? But Dinis Fer- 
nandez replied that, if his ship had strong cables he might 
remain where he was, for the weather would soon clear up, 
it was owing to the spring tides that the winds blew so, 
and he was going to steer for the other side of the island, 
to be sheltered from that wind, and as soon as the hurricane 
was over he would return. 

Afonso Dalboquerque ordered all the* pilots and masters 
to be assembled, and inquired of them what course the ship 
would take, and whether she would be lost ? They all told 
him not to be alarmed, for Dinis fiemandez was so good a 
seaman, that he would give a good account of her ; much 
more so as between those islands the sea was so smooth 



AFONSO DALBOQUEBQUE. 


255 


that the almadicLs were accustomed to go across from one 
side to the other without any danger. On hearing this that 
the pilots told him^ Afonso Dalboquerque became a little 
more encouraged^ but, nevertheless, he ordered Antonio do 
Noronha to go up a lofty hill which is on the island, whence 
all the sea round about can be perceived, taking with him 
some mariners, and to look abouc if he could see any vessel, 
and all those who went with him asserted that they saw a 
ship just doubling Cape Magandi.^ 

D. Antonio having returned, and all being now supplied 
with water, they set sail, and doubling the Cape, took a 
ship of Gnzarates,^ which came from the lied Sea sailing 
for Cambaya, laden with silk stuffs, alum, and seed pearl, 
and some money. Afonso Dalboquerque ordered the pilot 
and master to bo brought before him, and inquired of them 
if they had seen any large vessel in those parts belonging 
to his company. The pilot told him that, being at anchor 
behind the Cape, there came some fishing barques, return- 
ing from the open sea towards the shore, who told him that 
they wore flying from a vessel of the Franks which was 
steering towards India. On receiving this information, ho 
ordered the vessels to be stripped of all the merchandise 
they carried, and then to bo set on fire, but ho released the 
Moors, and let them go free, and then resumed his course, 
and without anything else taking place, came in sight of 
Angediva. 

And after remaining there for three days he started 
again, and reached Cananor, where ho found the Vice- 
roy in company with the captains who had deserted him, 
and with the Commendador Bui Soarez, who, though 
under his orders, was yet not willing to put himself in the 
way of performing his obligations; and these had now 

1 See p. 101, Note 1. 

Giijerat, Gujurat, or Guzerat, a province of the Presidency of 
Bombay. 



250 


COMMENTARIES OF AFONSO DALBOQUERQUE. 


spent upwards of a year thoro^ much favoured by the Vice- 
roy, instead of being punished by him for their desertion; 
and for leaving Afonso in the war. And in a few days^ time 
Dinis Fernandez arrived in the Bey Orande with all liis 
ship^s crew safe and sound. And for all that Afonso Dalbo- 
querque felt it deeply, when ho saw his captains in presence 
of the Viceroy unpunished, yet ho dissembled, and delivered 
over to him the fleet and crews, paying them all that was 
duo to them up to that hour, and gave him an account of 
tho trouble ho had had with the Moors and with the Chris- 
tians, having spent two years and eight months in the sea, 
conquering tho kingdom of Ormuz, as tho king, Uoin 
Manuel, his master, had ordered him, without experiencing 
any favour or help from tho Viceroy during the whole of 
that period. 


END OF TUE FIRST TART. 







